Afterword to the Paperback Edition.

In April 2011, AS MY MANUSCRIPT DEADLINE for the hardcover edition of The Darwin Economy was approaching, the U.S. economy was still in the doldrums. Many economists, myself included, had argued that the federal stimulus program enacted in 2009 was far too small for the problem at hand. In the face of a $2 trillion annual demand shortfall, it called for only $787 billion in stimulus measures spread out over three years. Even so, there were signs that the economy was slowly starting to recover.

So in my passages describing our political system’s inadequate response to the recession, I chose verb tenses that assumed the downturn would be largely behind us by the time the book was published. For instance, I wrote that the economy could have been revived more quickly if we had accelerated the infrastructure repairs that everyone agreed needed to be done anyway:

During the depths of the downturn, the workers and equipment necessary to do the work were sitting idle. And with considerable slack in markets worldwide, the required materials were available at unusually low prices. Interest rates for the money to finance these projects were near record lows.

But of course the recession was far from over when the hardcover edition came out in September 2011. And now, with the paperback edition set to appear in September 2012, it stubbornly continues. Efforts to repair our crumbling infrastructure weren't undertaken. The workers who could have done those jobs are still sitting idle, interest rates are still at historic lows, and materials are still cheap in world markets.

The recovery stalled in part because the federal stimulus program was weakened from the outset by large cuts in government spending at the state and local levels. Those cuts continue. Yet despite credible evidence that fiscal austerity has sent the British economy into a second slump, austerity advocates argue against further stimulus.

In both the United States and Europe, these advocates insist that a country cannot spend beyond its means indefinitely—that, like a family or a business, a government must eventually bring its expenses into line with its revenue. It’s a fair point if were talking about the long run. But it’s completely false for the short run.

The flaw in the austerity proponents argument is transparent. Consider an indebted family that must decide whether to borrow $5,000 to install additional insulation in its attic. Suppose that the project would reduce the family’s utility bills by an average of $100 a month and that monthly payments on the loan would be $50. In the short run, doing the project will increase their indebtedness, of course. But can there be any doubt that the family would be better off, both in the short and long run, by going forward with this project? Even while they’re still paying off the loan, they'll have $50 more each month if they do it. And once the loan is paid off, they'll have $100 a month more. What possible argument could be offered against this project?

Precisely the same logic applies to infrastructure investments undertaken during a recession. Paying for them requires an increase in government debt, yes. Austerity advocates claim on that basis that such projects will “impoverish our grandchildren.” Yet they concede that the investments cannot be postponed indefinitely, and that they'll become much more expensive the longer we postpone them. So it is in fact our failure to undertake these projects now that saddles our grandchildren with gratuitously larger debt.

The ongoing recession will burden our future in other ways. Recent graduates, for example, have been forced to launch their careers in the most difficult labor market since the Great Depression. The slow start many of them are getting will compromise their income trajectories for a lifetime. Because businesses are not investing at normal levels (why build new factories if you can already produce more than consumers want to buy?), the nation’s capital stock will be forever smaller, which means slower growth in productivity and wages. Widespread unemployment and lagging wages have meant higher divorce rates and additional children with inadequate nutrition. In each case, the effect is to reduce future tax receipts, pushing government budgets still further into the red.

The most important single step we could take to promote a brighter economic future for our grandchildren would be to end the recession as quickly as possible. And one of the surest ways to achieve that goal would be a large and immediate infrastructure refurbishment program. Yet the militantly antigovernment rhetoric that guides political discussion in the United States prevents us from even considering that step, much less taking it.

Recent experience thus suggests that the paralysis gripping our political system is even deeper and more stubborn than my account in chapter 1 suggested. And so it seems more urgent than ever to identify the forces behind it. Considerable evidence suggests that one of those forces has been the sharp growth in income inequality over the past four decades. Because virtually all income gains in the United States during that period have accrued to the nation’s top earners, that group now has a much bigger megaphone. And in the wake of the Supreme Court's Citizens United decision, wealthy campaign donors are less constrained than ever in their efforts to mold public policy to their own ends.

What they seem to want, and have been brilliantly successful at getting, are policies that will increase their incomes still further. Their tax rates have fallen significantly and their companies are much less stringently regulated. These policy shifts, in turn, have further amplified their political influence, enabling them to purchase still more policy favors, and so on.

Voters continue to be bombarded by messages insisting that taxes and regulation cripple the economy, claims that are at odds with all available evidence. Yet despite these messages, surveys indicate that most voters believe that taxes on the wealthy should revert to the higher rates in effect during the Clinton administration. But those beliefs haven't translated into political action, because any political party favoring that move would need the White House, a majority in the House, and more than sixty votes in the Senate in order to make it happen. There’s simply no obvious way an electoral shift of that magnitude could occur in the face of determined opposition by today’s wealthiest donors. The problem we face is thus one whose effects make it increasingly difficult to solve. In short, we appear trapped in an inescapable feedback loop.

But there may be a way forward. The key step is to focus greater attention on the fact that the interests of the wealthy themselves have actually been poorly served by the policies they've been purchasing. To be sure, they've managed to capture a larger share of the national income. But persuasive evidence suggests that even the wealthy have been made worse off, on balance, by the policies they favor. The private benefits from those policies have been much smaller, and their indirect costs much larger, than they had anticipated.

The basic problem is that beyond some point, across-the-board increases in private spending produce little gain in well-being. Some of the tax cuts received by wealthy donors have been used to build larger mansions, for example, but when thirty-thousand-square-foot mansions grow 10 percent larger, the primary effect is merely to raise the bar that defines adequate housing in their social circle.

In contrast, higher spending on many forms of public consumption would produce clear gains in well-being for everyone, including the wealthy. It's reasonable to assume, for example, that driving on well-maintained roads is safer and less stressful than driving on pothole-ridden ones.

Of course, raising the tax revenue needed to fill the potholes would mean leaving the wealthy with less to spend on automobiles. But consider the following simple thought experiment. In one hypothetical society, all wealthy motorists drive $150,000 Mercedes sedans on well-maintained roads. In a second, otherwise identical, society, all wealthy motorists drive $200,000 Bentley sedans on roads riddled with foot-deep potholes. In which society would the wealthy be more satisfied with their overall driving experience?

The second society describes roughly where we are today, but if, like most people, you believe that wealthy drivers in the first society would be more satisfied, that raises a challenging question: If driving less expensive vehicles on substantially better roads would obviously be better, then why do the wealthy lobby so vehemently against the higher taxes needed for improved infrastructure? A plausible explanation is that they suffer from a simple cognitive illusion when they think about how higher taxes would affect them.

If you pay higher taxes, you obviously have less money to spend on what you want. So the prospect of a tax increase naturally inclines people to think that they'll be less able to satisfy their desires.

Yet once incomes rise beyond a modest absolute threshold, many of the things that people want are what economists call positional goods. These may be things that are inherently in short supply, like gorgeous waterfront property; or things whose value depends heavily on context, like precious stones or sure-footed sports cars. Because positional goods are in short supply, they go to the highest bidders. The tendency to overlook that simple fact distorts how people think about the effects of higher taxes.

The cognitive illusion occurs because most financial setbacks that people experience in life stem from events that affect them alone. They may suffer health emergencies, for instance, or problems at work. Marriages may fail, jewelry may be stolen, and floods may damage homes. In each case, the effect is to limit their ability to bid for positional goods.

Because an overwhelming majority of financial setbacks occur for such idiosyncratic reasons, it’s natural to think that the income decline from higher taxes would have similar effects. But a tax increase is different. It affects all participants in the bidding for positional goods. And because it leaves everyone with less to spend, it has essentially no effect on the outcomes of those contests. The same paintings and the same marina slips end up in the same hands as before.

It would be one thing if lobbying against taxes and regulation brought wealthy donors a world more to their liking. But if their goal is to buy a home with a more spectacular view, for example, they will be disappointed. There are only so many such homes to go around, and they’ll be bought by the very same people as before, since a tax cut enables everyone to bid more.

Bottom line: when the antitax wealthy make campaign contributions, they are buying only the deeper potholes and dirtier air that inevitably result when tax revenue is low and regulation is lax.

Reductions in top tax rates have also harmed the wealthy in numerous other ways. The resulting deficits, for example, have led to cuts in federal financing for basic scientific research, even as the United States’ share of global patents granted continues to decline. Such cuts threaten the very basis of our long-term economic prosperity.

Deficits have also compromised the nation’s security. For instance, the George W. Bush administration reduced financing for the Energy Department’s program to secure loosely guarded nuclear stockpiles in the former Soviet Union by 8 percent. In an unsuccessful effort to compensate for the cutback, Sam Nunn, the former United States senator, attempted to raise private donations to expedite this effort. And despite the rational fear that terrorists may try to detonate a nuclear bomb in an American city, most cargo containers continue to enter the nation’s ports without inspection.

Self-interest is a powerful human motive. As long as the wealthy believe that lower tax rates serve their own interests, they will continue to allocate their political contributions to political candidates who favor them. This will cause incomes to grow still more unequal, and the pernicious feedback loop will continue.

Moralists often urge the wealthy to imagine how easily their lives could have turned out differently, to adopt a more forgiving posture toward those less prosperous. Well and good. But a more promising approach would be to highlight evidence that even the wealthiest families would have been better off, in purely practical terms, had it not been for the policy changes they themselves supported.
