Chapter 2. Darwin’s Wedge.

I was born in 1945. When someone my age makes a forecast about someles that will happen a hundred years from now, he needn't worry about being teased by friends if it doesn’t pan out. Without trepidation, then, I offer the following prediction. One century hence, if a roster of professional economists is asked to identify the intellectual father of their discipline, a majority will name Charles Darwin.

If the same question were posed today, of course, more than 99 percent of my colleagues would name Adam Smith. My views about Darwin's significance reflect no shortage of admiration for Smith on my part. On the contrary, reading any random passage from the eighteenth-century Scottish moral philosopher's masterwork, The Wealth of Nations, still causes me to marvel at the depth and breadth of his insights.

Charles Darwin was himself no slouch, obviously, yet few people outside academic departments of biology and economics associate his name with ideas in economics. Those who have studied Darwin's theory of evolution carefully, however, realize that he was in fact heavily influenced by the works of the economists Thomas Malthus and David Ricardo. Malthus had been a student of Smith's, and Ricardo was heavily influenced by The Wealth of Nations. So even if my prediction comes true, Smith’s fans can still justifiably think of him as the great-grandfather of economics.

I base my prediction on a subtle but extremely important distinction between Darwin's view of the competitive process and Smith's. Today Smith is best remembered for his invisible-hand theory, which, according to some of his modern disciples, holds that impersonal market forces channel the behavior of greedy individuals to produce the greatest good for all. As noted in chapter 1, this characterization is an oversimplification. But it captures an important dimension of Smith’s understanding of the competitive process. In any event, its fair to say that the invisible-hand theory's optimistic portrayal of unregulated market outcomes has become the bedrock of the antigovernment activists worldview. They believe regulation is unnecessary because they believe unbridled market forces can take care of things quite nicely on their own.

Darwin's view of the competitive process was fundamentally different. His observations persuaded him that the interests of individual animals were often profoundly in conflict with the broader interests of their own species. In time, I predict, the invisible hand will come to be seen as a special case of Darwin's more general theory. Many of the libertarians’ most cherished beliefs, which are perfectly plausible within Smith’s framework, don't survive at all in Darwin’.

Giving the Invisible Hand Its Due

Even so, the invisible-hand theory remains a genuinely revolutionary insight, all the more so because in hindsight it seems so obvious. Why does a business owner go to the trouble of designing a new product that consumers are likely to find appealing? Why does he invest such effort to revamp his production process to reduce costs? The motive, as Smith and undoubtedly many before him clearly saw, was simply to make more money. What others did not see clearly was the responses those actions would provoke from rival business owners, and how the ensuing dynamic would produce outcomes very different from the ones intended.

If one producer comes up with a cheaper way of manufacturing a product, he can cut his price slightly and steal market share from his rivals. In the short run, his profits soar, just as he'd hoped. But the loss of market share by rival firms gives their owners a powerful incentive to mimic the original innovation. And once the innovation spreads industrywide, the resulting competition drives the product’s price down to a level just sufficient to cover the new, lower production costs. The ultimate beneficiaries of all this churning are consumers, who enjoy steadily improved products at ever-lower prices.

The Wealth of Nations was published in 1776, not even 250 years ago. What an extraordinary narrative, Smith's invisible hand! Thousands of brilliant minds had earlier observed the same patterns that prompted Smith's insight, yet none had managed to appreciate their significance. Aristotle didn't see it. Copernicus didn't see it. Newton didn't see it.

Smith was well aware that unregulated markets didn't always produce the best outcomes. For the most part, the market failures that were his focus involved underhanded practices by business leaders in a position to wield power. Thus, he wrote, “To widen the market and to narrow the competition, is always in the interest of [those who live by profit]... . [Such interest] comes from an order of men, whose interest is never exactly the same with that of the public, who have generally an interest to deceive and even to oppress the public, and who accordingly have, upon many occasions, both deceived and oppressed it.”!

When markets failed, in Smith’s view, it was because of an absence of effective competition. A firm might deceive its customers about the quality of its offerings; or it might cut prices to drive rivals out of business, only to raise prices again once they were gone. Such abuses were common in Smith’s day and, though less frequent now, remain part of the landscape.

Social critics on the left have long focused on anticompetitive behavior as the key to understanding why markets fail. The late John Kenneth Galbraith, for example, stressed the contrast between the “traditional sequence” envisioned by Adam Smith’s modern disciples and a “revised sequence” that Galbraith saw as a more accurate portrayal of the modern marketplace.’ In the traditional sequence, consumers enter the market with well-formed preferences, and firms struggle to meet their demands as well and cheaply as possible. But in Galbraith’s revised sequence, powerful corporations first decide which products would be most convenient and profitable for them to produce, and then hire Madison Avenue hucksters to persuade consumers to want those products.

Many economists remain skeptical about this account, citing conspicuous examples of corporate failure, such as the Ford Edsel in Galbraith’s day.’ Ford introduced the Edsel with great fanfare in September 1957. It was named for Edsel B. Ford, son of company founder Henry Ford, and its outsized promotional budget included a widely viewed national television special, The Edsel Show. But customers never showed much enthusiasm for the car, and its production was discontinued in 1960.

More recently, Microsoft spent almost a billion dollars to develop and promote the Kin, a smartphone targeted at the youth market. The phone, which hit stores in April 2010, was unceremoniously pulled from shelves just forty-five days later because of abysmal sales.

Notwithstanding such failures, there is little doubt that advertising campaigns can shift consumer tastes. But from the perspective of those who are skeptical about markets, advertising wizardry is a two-edged sword. The driving force behind the invisible hand is greed, and if producers are currently selling inferior products at inflated prices, there’s cash on the table. If a rival producer could let consumers know that a better, cheaper model was available, he could make lots of money. Modern marketing methods are surely up to that task. Competition is obviously still far from perfect, but today’s markets are much closer to the perfectly informed, frictionless ideal than were those of Adam Smith’s day.

Individual and Group Interests Often Diverge

Darwin trained his sights on competition not among merchants but among individual members of plant and animal species. But the two domains, he realized, share deep similarities. Darwin's analysis revealed a systemic flaw in the dynamics of competition. The failures he identified resulted not from too little competition, but from the very logic of the process itself. The central premise of his theory was that natural selection favored variants of traits and behaviors insofar as they enhanced the reproductive fitness of the individual animals that bore them. If a trait made the individual better able to survive and reproduce, it would be favored. Otherwise, it would eventually vanish. In many cases, Darwin recognized, the same variant that served the individual’s interest would also serve the interests of its species. But he also saw that many traits promoted individual interest to the detriment of the species.

As an example in the former category, consider the speed of the gazelle. Mature members of this species can sustain speeds of 30 mph for extended periods and can reach 60 mph in short bursts. How did they become so fast? It might seem that being faster would be unambiguously better from an evolutionary point of view, but that can't be true or else all species would be fast. Tapeworms are slow. In their particular environmental niche, however, being fast never really mattered. Gazelles are fast because they evolved in an environment in which being faster than others was often decisive for survival. The gazelle’s predators, which include the cheetah, are also very fast, and there are few places to take shelter on the terrain where both groups evolved. Slower genetic variants among the modern gazelle’s ancestors were more likely to be caught and eaten.

Since the selective pressure that forged speed in gazelles was the threat of being caught by predators from other species, greater speed posed no conflict between the interests of individual gazelles and those of gazelles as a species.’ Up to some point, being faster conferred advantages for both individual.and species. With respect to this particular trait, then, Darwin’s natural selection narrative closely tracks Smith's parallel invisible-hand narrative about the proliferation of cost-saving innovations and attractive new product designs.

Many other traits, however, increase the reproductive fitness of each individual while simultaneously imposing significant costs on large subgroups of the species. Such conflicts are especially likely for traits that confer advantage in an individual's head-to-head competition with members of its own species.

A case in point is the outsized antlers of bull elk. These antlers function as weaponry not against external predators but in the competition among bulls for access to females. In these battles, it’s relative antler size that matters. Because a mutation that coded for larger antlers made a bull more likely to defeat its rivals, it was quick to spread, since winning bulls gained access to many cows, each of whose calves would then carry the mutation. Additional mutations accumulated over the generations, in effect creating an arms race. The process seems to have stabilized, with the largest antlers of North American bull elk measuring more than 4 feet across and weighing more than 40 pounds.

Although each mutation along this path enhanced individual reproductive fitness, the cumulative effect of those mutations was to make life more miserable for bull elk as a group. Large antlers compromise mobility in densely wooded areas, for example, making bulls more likely to be killed and eaten by wolves. A bull with smaller antlers would be better able to escape predators, but because he'd be handicapped in his battles with other bulls, he'd be unlikely to pass those smaller antlers into the next generation.

In short, bull elk face a collective action problem. One bull's larger antlers make him more likely to win a fight, but they also make his rivals more likely to lose that same fight. The individual payoff to having larger antlers is thus substantially larger than the collective payoff. As a group, bull elk would be better off if each animal's antlers were much smaller.

The conflict between individual and species arises because reproductive fitness is essentially a relative concept. Under natural selection, the traits that succeed are those that confer relative advantage. To spread, it’s not sufficient that a genetic variant be helpful. It must be more helpful than the other variants with which it’s competing. A trait that evolves because it helps the individual prevail in battles against members of the same species typically constitutes a handicap for the species as a whole. Antlers are such a trait. At every stage of the arms race that molded them, the relative advantages to individuals canceled one another out, and when the race finally stabilized, the species was saddled with a substantial absolute handicap.

Darwin’s insight does a lot of the heavy lifting in my project to take the libertarian’s basic principles as my starting point and then explore what those principles imply about the kind of government that freedom-loving people might choose for themselves. Their choice clearly depends heavily on the kinds of outcomes they can expect from unbridled competition in the marketplace. Libertarians’ expectations have been guided by Smith's invisible-hand narrative and its presumption of perfect competition. In the natural environments that were Darwin's concern, the kinds of impediments to competition that worry traditional market skeptics were almost completely absent. Yet Darwin’s understanding of the competitive process itself supports a profound measure of skepticism about market outcomes. It’s instructive to examine more closely how that understanding causes the invisible-hand account to falter.

The libertarian’s faith in unregulated markets rests on several premises. Two of the most important are that consumers are well informed and that markets are competitive. Unless we insist on reading these premises literally, there is nothing in Darwin's framework that challenges either of them. Of course, with so many millions of products and services on offer, no consumer could possibly be well informed about every option that might be worth considering. But consumers are reasonably well informed, or could choose to become so, about the options most likely to be important. Similarly, no market could possibly satisfy all the stringent conditions required for perfect competition—completely free entry and exit and a large number of firms producing identical, standardized products, each serving only a small share of the market. Yet most markets are workably competitive, in the sense that if a clearly better option were possible, some entrepreneur would eventually step forward and make consumers aware of it.

In short, Darwin's challenge has nothing to do with the kinds of competitive imperfections traditionally invoked by market skeptics. If libertarians were going to empower the state to regulate firms in any way, it would not be because of any evidence that markets were insufficiently competitive.

But Adam Smith's invisible-hand narrative also requires some additional assumptions, ones that available evidence should lead any reasonable person to question. One is that people are rationally attentive to all relevant costs and benefits of the various options they consider. Another is that, to the extent that material resources matter for well-being, it’s absolute income that counts, not relative income. Compelling evidence suggests that both assumptions fail in ways that undermine the invisible-hand narrative. The implications of the second assumption’s failure, we will see, are especially problematic.

As concerns the first assumption, a large body of research has demonstrated that people are not attentive to costs and benefits in the manner required by traditional theories of rational consumer behavior.> For example, people are generally attentive even to small costs and benefits that are certain to affect them immediately, but they tend to give short shrift to even large costs and benefits that either are uncertain or occur with significant delay. People also exhibit a systematic tendency to treat gains very differently from losses. That asymmetry is not irrational per se, but its magnitude often leads to outcomes that are unattractive from the decision maker’s own point of view.

Failure of the rationality assumption might lead people to empower government to restructure the decision environment in various ways that would foster better choices. But the question of how government might respond to those failures is not my focus here. That question has already received comprehensive treatment from Thaler and Sunstein in Nudge. Instead, my focus will be on the question of what kind of government a fully empowered libertarian would choose if she were persuaded by the evidence that people's concerns about relative position figure prominently in their economic decisions. Such concerns, as we'll see, don’t constitute a departure from rationality at all.

The Importance of Relative Position

As Darwin saw clearly, much of life is graded on the curve. For a genetic mutation to be favored, it’s not sufficient that it enable the individual to generate large numbers of offspring. It must enable him to produce more offspring than rivals who do not carry the mutation. Reproductive fitness is thus a quintessentially relative concept. To survive and prosper, an individual need not be the strongest, fastest, or smartest animal in the universe. He may be weak, slow, and stupid. What matters is that he be able to compete successfully against members of his own species vying for the same resources.

To do so, his nervous system must absorb information about the local environment and calculate the extent to which different behavioral options will contribute to his ability to achieve various goals. But his nervous system must also perform another important function, which is to rank those goals. Which goals are most important? Which ones should be abandoned during times of duress?

We can't pretend to understand how markets function unless we begin with a reasonably accurate portrait of the structure of human motivation. Human motivation resides in the brain, which has been evolving for millions of years. Its proximate purpose in every generation was to guide its bearer to take the actions that would best promote the transmission of its genetic blueprint into the next generation. The Darwinian framework is the only scientific framework available for trying to understand why humans and other animals are motivated to behave as they do.

To think of the brain as an evolved organ is not to deny the importance of culture in human behavior. Humans and their cultures obviously evolved in tandem, each exerting substantial influence on the other.® Many have found it instructive to view the evolved brain as the hardware of the human motivational system and culture as the corresponding software.’ As this more nuanced view emphasizes, human motivation is extremely complex and multidimensional.

When economists try to model it in an attempt to understand how markets work, we're forced to adopt stick-figure simplifications. But some of those simplifications have been extreme. Most economists, for example, assume that people are purely selfish, even though there is compelling evidence for motives that transcend narrow self-interest.’ Most also assume that the satisfaction people take from consumption depends only on the absolute amount of it, even in the face of compelling evidence that relative consumption also matters.’

Since reproductive success has always depended first and foremost on relative resource holdings, it would be astonishing if the evolved brain didn’t care deeply about relative position. Most vertebrate societies, including the vast majority of early human societies, were polygynous, meaning that males claimed more than one mate when they could. It was the high-ranking males in those societies who claimed multiple mates. And given the inexorable logic of musical chairs, it was the low-ranking males who were left with none.

Famines were also a frequent survival threat in the environments in which humans evolved. But even in the worst famines, there was always some food available. And the question of who got fed was almost always settled by relative income. Then as now, it was the poorest in every group who were most likely to starve.

Against the backdrop of this payoff structure, imagine two genetic variants —one that codes for a brain that cares strongly about relative position, and the other for a brain that doesn't care at all about it. In general, caring more strongly about something inclines you to expend more mental and physical energy to acquire it. So individuals who care more about relative position would be more likely to muster the behaviors necessary to acquire and defend positions of high rank. That, in turn, would make them more likely to survive famines and marry successfully, thus increasing their genotype’s frequency in the next generation.

The current environment is of course very different from the ones in which our ancestors evolved. But relative position still matters, often for purely instrumental reasons. When you go for a job interview, for example, you want to dress presentably, but the standards for looking good are almost purely relative. An interviewer many have no conscious awareness of how different candidates were dressed. But if you show up in a $500 suit, you'll be more likely to get a callback if other candidates were wearing $200 suits than if they were dressed in $2,000 suits. And as discussed earlier, parents who want to send their children to good schools must outbid other parents for houses in good school districts. Their ability to do so depends almost entirely on relative income. Here, too, we see the logic of musical chairs: no matter how much money people earn, only half of all children can attend schools in the top half.

Context and Evaluation

Experience confirms that psychological reactions to many consumption experiences depend heavily on the context in which those experiences occur. Some people, for example, derive pleasure from the experience of driving a fast car. But how fast does a car have to be to deliver that pleasure? It’s impossible even to think about that question without knowing something about the relevant context. In the 1920s, a car would have seemed fast if it could eventually reach 60 mph. But as the years have passed, the standards that define fast have changed considerably.

The first sports car I ever drove was a 1955 Ford Thunderbird. Its 292cubic-inch V8 engine generated almost 200 horsepower and propelled the car from o to 60 mph in 11.5 seconds. I'll never forget how blisteringly fast it seemed at the time. In recent years, I've been driving a 2001 Mazda Miata. Although its engine has less than half the displacement of the ’55 Thunderbird’s, it can reach 60 mph in less than 8 seconds. It’s a great little car, but even though it’s significantly faster than the old Thunderbird, it doesn’t seem nearly as fast. That’s because in the current sports car constellation it isn’t fast. The 2011 Miata will reach 60 mph in 6.5 seconds. Nearer the top of the performance ladder, the 2011 Porsche 911 Turbo reaches that speed in less than 3 seconds. That’s fast. But it won't seem fast forever.

The hypothesis that concerns about relative position are part of the evolved circuitry of the human brain is supported not just by everyday experience, but also by evidence of specific neurophysiological processes that respond to local rank. For example, local rank appears to both affect, and be affected by, concentrations of the neurotransmitter serotonin, which regulates moods and behavior. Within limits, elevated serotonin concentrations are associated with enhanced feelings of well-being. (The drug Prozac, widely prescribed for depression and other mood disorders, increases the effective concentrations of serotonin in the brain.)

In males, concentrations of the sex hormone testosterone appear to have a similar relationship with local rank. Reductions in local rank tend to be followed by reductions in plasma testosterone levels, whereas these levels tend to rise following increases in rank. A player who wins a tennis match decisively, for example, experiences a postmatch elevation in plasma testosterone, and his vanquished opponent experiences a postmatch reduction. As with serotonin, elevated concentrations of testosterone appear to facilitate behaviors that help achieve or maintain high local rank."

Further evidence of the importance of relative position comes from studies of the determinants of happiness, or subjective well-being. Early investigators found that whereas measured average happiness levels within a country tend to be highly stable over time, even in the face of significant economic growth, individual happiness levels within any country at a given moment of time depend strongly on income." And recent work documents a robust negative association between individual happiness measures and average neighborhood income.”

In sum, no economic model can hope to capture how markets actually function unless it begins with the assumption that context shapes evaluation in significant ways. Yet the models that underlie Adam Smith’s invisible-hand narrative assume, preposterously, that context doesn’t matter at all. And it’s not just libertarians and right-wing zealots who embrace that assumption. All economic forecasting and policy analysis done in government for more than a century have relied on the very same models.

Our task in the next three chapters will be to explore how explicit recognition of the importance of context alters our understanding of how markets function. As we'll see, adding this simple feature is the key to understanding why the invisible hand breaks down, even when consumers are fully informed and interact with employers and sellers under conditions of perfect competition. We'll also see that failure to understand why markets fail has led many on the left to invent spurious explanations for why we need to regulate them. Their claim is that regulation is necessary to protect us from exploitation by sellers and employers with market power. But the real reason we regulate is to protect ourselves from the consequences of excessive competition with one another.

Why Are Traditional Economic Models Context-Free?

As we'll see, wasteful competition follows from the simple fact that evaluation depends strongly on context in many domains. That context shapes evaluation is completely uncontroversial. Would any sane person really want to stand before an informed audience to defend the assertion that context doesn’t matter? What could possibly persuade someone, for example, that perceptions about whether a car is fast are completely independent of the performance of other cars in the same local environment? It would be an utterly hopeless task. But that very fact raises the question of how we came to embrace context-free economic theories in the first place. So before we explore how context shapes economic behavior, it will be useful to consider that question.

In recent years, I have posed it to a number of economists. One suggested that the importance of context will be fully embraced once it can be shown conclusively that it helps us track the data better than traditional models. Experience, however, suggests otherwise. In earlier work, for example, I’ve pointed out that economists have been reluctant to abandon theories of saving based on absolute income, even in the face of compelling evidence that theories based on relative income do a much better job of tracking the data.”

Another economist speculated that many of our colleagues fear that taking context seriously might signal a certain lack of rigor. After all, many economists take considerable pride in their ability to formalize their theories mathematically. Some in that camp might fear that taking positional concerns seriously could cause them to be mistaken for sociologists. Yet as past work has amply demonstrated, there is no barrier to formalizing models that incorporate positional concerns."* Those models can be as complex as economists want to make them.

Still another economist suggested that the unwillingness to take context seriously might be rooted in the fact that doing so would undermine the celebrated invisible-hand narrative. This explanation may well account for the attitudes of at least some economists. But it’s not sufficient. The profession, after all, has incorporated numerous other forms of market failure into its arsenal of policy recommendations. Even the most ardent market enthusiasts, for example, are quick to concede a productive role for government intervention to curb pollution when transaction costs are high.

A final possibility I consider is the one that strikes me as most plausible. In the more than thirty years I have been writing about positional concerns, the most frequent response of libertarians and others on the right has been to accuse me of trying to incite class warfare. They dismiss positional concerns for the same reason they dismiss the preferences of sadists. But bringing positional concerns into the conversation is nothing remotely like giving policy weight to the preferences of sadists. We can all agree that society has a legitimate interest in discouraging negative emotions like envy and jealousy. Because there will always be someone out there with more and better stuff, being preoccupied with that fact would be a sure recipe for unhappiness. Teaching our children not to envy the good fortunes of others is a worthwhile project. But such teachings, even if completely successful, will not eliminate the consequences of wasteful spending prompted by concerns about relative position. Such waste stems far less from envy than from the fact that many important rewards in life depend on relative consumption. In any event, tax remedies for collective action problems are no more an endorsement of envy than speeding tickets are an endorsement of driving too fast.
