Chapter 9. Success and Luck.

People often speak about THE EMOTIONAL BRAIN and the rational brain as if there really were two independent people housed within us— one driven by reason, the other by emotion. But neuroscientists stress that the brain’s emotional circuits and cognitive circuits are richly interdependent.’

In exceptional circumstances, strong emotional reactions can occur even in the absence of significant cognitive processing. This happens, for example, at the sight of a snake-like object, which can provoke fear before the image even reaches the cognitive circuits of the brain.* More generally, however, our emotional reactions to events depend critically on how we frame and interpret them cognitively.

To know whether someone's behavior constitutes a violation that merits an angry response, for example, we must first know a lot about the context in which the behavior occurred and the rules that apply in that context. In familiar settings, our emotional reactions to events are generally well calibrated. But misdirected emotional reactions are not uncommon, especially when we find ourselves in unfamiliar cultural settings.

A vivid case in point occurred during the sabbatical year my family and I spent in Paris. My youngest son, Hayden, was a fifth-grader in a French school in the city that year. One afternoon, he came home in a state of high indignation. He explained that he'd been given an avertissement—a school disciplinary notice—for something he hadn't done. The charge against him had been filed by a playground supervisor who said that a student had shouted an obscenity at him. The supervisor was unable to identify the specific offender, so he filed charges against all the children who were playing nearby, a group that included Hayden.

Insisting that he'd never said a word to the supervisor, Hayden wanted us to demand a hearing to set the record straight. I asked some friends for advice and was told that there was virtually no chance the school would conduct an investigation. I also learned, however, that there was no consequence from receiving an avertissement unless a student had already accumulated three previous ones during the same school year.

I explained to Hayden that the French system of school justice seemed to be a little different from the one we were used to at home. Rather than invest a lot of time and effort to uncover the specific facts surrounding every potential infraction, the French had adopted an alternative approach that produced roughly similar results. I explained that even a full-blown investigation might reach an erroneous conclusion, and that although the odds of making a mistake were obviously higher in the absence of an investigation, it was still very likely that a student who had managed to accumulate four avertissements in a single school year would be guilty in at least one instance. What struck me at the time was how quickly my son's sense of outrage evaporated when he considered this alternative way of thinking about the problem.

The cognitive frames within which we view taxes have similarly powerful effects on our emotional reactions to them. If we think of being taxed as akin to some unknown person confiscating something that rightfully belongs to us, it’s almost impossible not to react angrily. But taxes are more plausibly viewed through a different lens. As discussed in the preceding chapter, for example, the high average income levels of modern industrial nations would not be possible in the absence of extensive public investments paid for by taxes. That realization begins to chip away at the cognitive frame necessary to support an uncritically angry reaction to being taxed.

But even among those who grant the legitimacy of taxation, there often remains a stubborn perception that they personally are overtaxed. This perception naturally tends to be concentrated among those with the highest pretax incomes, who pay dramatically more than others in taxes. Notwithstanding populist complaints about the myriad tax loopholes available to the wealthy, the top 10 percent of earners in the United States accounted for more than 71 percent of all federal income taxes paid in 2007, while the top 1 percent accounted for more than 40 percent.’

Success and Merit

In his address to the Democratic National Convention in 1988, Texas Agricultural Commissioner Jim Hightower described George H. W. Bush as a man who “was born on third base and thought he'd hit a triple.”* But given the conspicuous role that his family’s background had played in his career, Mr. Bush had to have been aware that good fortune had smiled on him. Typically, it’s the self-made man whos the more fitting target of Hightower’s remark. He knows how hard he worked. He vividly remembers every sacrifice he made. And far more than most wealthy heirs, he's likely to be blissfully unaware of good luck’s pivotal role in his success.

If people tend to overlook the role of good luck in their own success, they also tend to overlook the role of bad luck in others’ failures. People sometimes file for bankruptcy because they failed to work hard and spent recklessly. But in the United States, many more bankruptcies occur when people fall seriously ill or lose their jobs, and with them their health insurance. Such mitigating factors are conspicuously absent from much social commentary about poverty. Witness, for example, the sentiments expressed bya commenter on Instapundit, a conservative blog hosted by University of Tennessee law professor Glenn Reynolds:

A reason for the “wealth or income gap”: Smart people keep on doing things that are smart and make them money while stupid people keep on doing things that are stupid and keep them from achieving. People who get an education, stay off of drugs, apply themselves, and save and wisely invest their earnings do a lot better than people who drop out of school, become substance abusers, and buy fancy cars and houses that they can't afford, only to lose them. We don't have an income gap. We have a stupid gap.

Reynolds anointed these remarks the “Comment of the Day” on the hightraffic site.

People who work hard and stay focused are of course more likely than others to succeed. Yet as economists have become increasingly aware, success depends far more on the vagaries of chance than most people once imagined. And so does economic failure.

One of my central themes in this book is that as individuals we often face incentives that lead us to undermine the common good, and that to counteract these incentives, taxes are generally a far more efficient and less intrusive instrument than direct regulation. But advocating new taxes in the United States has often been described as politically unthinkable, largely because of prevailing cognitive frames that portray taxation as a violation of individual liberty. The thorough overhaul of tax policy that the country desperately needs will not happen until new cognitive frames begin to crowd out those that have supported that perception.

Attempts to reframe this debate will yield slow progress at best. But because our current tax structure is so profoundly wasteful, they’re worth making. A useful first step is to examine more closely the relationship between success and luck.

Contrary to what many parents tell their children, talent and hard work are neither necessary nor sufficient for economic success. Most successful people are of course both prodigiously talented and extremely hardworking. Yet some people enjoy spectacular success despite having neither attribute. (Participants in reality TV shows? Lip-synching members of boy bands? Money managers who bet clients’ retirement savings on subprime securities and got out before the market crashed?)

Far more numerous, however, are highly talented people who have worked extremely hard, yet have achieved only modest earnings. There are thousands of them for every person who strikes it rich. The biggest winners tend to be people who are talented, ambitious, hardworking, and extremely lucky.

Bill Gates: Lucky Stiff?

Consider Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates, for many years the wealthiest man on earth and still one of the top three. He was born in 1955 to a well-to-do Seattle family, attended private schools, and began programming computers at the age of 13. His Seattle high school had a computer club, an extreme rarity at the time, and he also enjoyed extensive access to the computer labs at the University of Washington.

That background—coupled with his intelligence, ambition, and capacity to work hard—enabled him to form a start-up software company with his high school friend and Harvard classmate, Paul Allen. Microsoft became a going concern long before the rest of us ever heard about it, but its founders surely had no idea when they named their company in 1976 what a spectacular future lay in store for it.

The sequence of events that made that future possible began when IBM approached Microsoft to inquire about developing an operating system for the personal computer it was planning to introduce. As Leonard Mlodinow recounts the story in a 1990 book, Gates initially told IBM that Microsoft couldn't take on the project.® He suggested that IBM instead contact Gary Kildall, whose firm, Digital Research, had already developed a personal computer operating system called CP/M.

But Kildall’s wife, who managed Digital Research, was reluctant to sign the nondisclosure agreement that IBM required, so those talks broke off. Jack Sams of IBM then went back to Gates to discuss other possibilities. Both Sams and Gates knew about another operating system that might be available. It was QDOS, the “quick and dirty operating system” that had been written in six weeks by Tim Paterson of Seattle Computer Products, using Kildall’s CP/M manual as his starting point. Paterson had apparently modified QDOS sufficiently to establish a plausible legal claim to ownership.

In Mlodinow’s account, Gates then asked Sams what proved to be the multibillion-dollar question: “Do you want to get... [QDOS], or do you want me to?” Not seeming to grasp the economic implications of the question, Sams reportedly responded, “By all means, you get it” Gates then negotiated Microsoft's purchase of QDOS for roughly $50,000, modified it further, and renamed it MS-DOS, for Microsoft disk operating system. But his biggest stroke of luck came when IBM, apparently pessimistic about the personal computer's prospects for success, permitted Microsoft to retain ownership of the operating system, each copy of which it could then license for a modest royalty fee. It was that last step that sealed Microsoft’s meteoric rise.

If it or any one of the other events in the sequence had not occurred—if Gates’s high school had not had a computer club, if Kildall’s wife had been willing to sign IBM’s nondisclosure agreement, if Paterson had negotiated with Microsoft more attentively—Bill Gates almost certainly never would have succeeded on such a grand scale.

To their credit, the Gates family seems well aware of how fortunate they have been. When Gates himself was later asked how many other teens had backgrounds similar to his before heading off to college, he said, “If there were 50 in the world, I'd be stunned. I had a better exposure to software development at a young age than I think anyone did in that period of time, and all because of an incredibly lucky series of events.”” In recent years, Gates and his wife have donated more than $30 billion to endow the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, which has done much to eradicate human suffering around the globe. And Gates’s father, Bill Gates, Sr., has long been a forceful critic of proposals to eliminate the estate tax.

Luck in Sports

The importance of each chance event supporting Bill Gates’s success may seem obvious in hindsight. But many other success stories rest on chance events that seem insignificant even when called to our attention. Consider the sequence that leads ultimately to a successful career as a professional athlete. In hockey, for example, Malcolm Gladwell points out that some 40 percent of all players in the premier professional leagues around the world were born in January, February, or March, while only 10 percent were born in October, November, or December.’ The reason for this striking disparity, he argues, is that January 1 was the traditional cutoff birth date for participation in youth hockey leagues almost everywhere.

Players born early in the year were thus the oldest members of their team at each successive stage. On average, they were slightly bigger, stronger, faster, and more experienced than their teammates born in later months. Because they were more likely to excel at each stage, they were more likely to be chosen for elite traveling teams and for all-star teams. They were more likely to be funneled into the programs with the best facilities and the best coaching, more likely to receive athletic scholarships, and so on.

Why It Sometimes Helps to Deny the Role of Luck

Gladwell’s point is not that being born in January guarantees that a Pee Wee hockey hopeful will grow up to play in the NHL. Rather, it’s that even such a simple accident as the timing of his birthday can profoundly alter his odds of success.

Of course, the fact that hard work and skill do not guarantee success has seldom discouraged successful people from ascribing their own success to skill and hard work. Because most successful people are both highly skillful and extremely hardworking, and since they'd have been much less likely to succeed without those qualities, the attraction of the narrative is palpable. But why are some people more skillful than others in the first place? And why do some people work so much harder than others? On closer examination, it quickly becomes apparent that even those qualities entail heavy elements of luck.

Debate continues about the extent to which personal traits are attributable to environmental and genetic factors. But whatever the true weights may be, in combination those factors explain virtually everything. Someone is smart either because she was born with genes that made her smart, or because she was raised in a nurturing, stimulating environment that fostered her intellectual development, or—almost certainly—because of some combination of those two factors.

The same is true of someone with an unusually strong capacity and inclination to work hard. That aspect of her character may be partly genetic, and it may be partly a result of the particular circumstances of her upbringing. But whatever the true weights might be, there can be no doubt that someone possessed of these qualities enjoys a substantial advantage in life.

On what grounds might people born with good genes and raised in nurturing families claim moral credit for their talent and industriousness? The plain fact is that they were just lucky. Even though having those qualities does not guarantee their success, it makes their odds vastly higher than those for people born without talent and raised in unsupportive environments.

Again, to observe that the link between success and luck is far stronger than many think is not to deny that working harder makes you more likely to succeed. Nor is it to deny that working hard is often experienced as, well, hard. The story is told of a man who on meeting a renowned violinist at a cocktail party said, “Id give anything to be able to play as beautifully as you do” “Would you be willing,” the virtuoso asked, “to practice eight hours every day?”

The psychologist K. Anders Ericsson, an expert on professional expertise, estimates that roughly ten thousand hours of dedicated practice time is required for achieving genuine expertise at many skills.’ Those hours needn't be all toil and drudgery. The Beatles, for example, logged more than ten thousand hours polishing their skills in dive bars in Hamburg, Germany, before becoming an overnight success in their native England; and as various biographies recount their experience, they quite enjoyed their time in Hamburg. Bill Gates spent more than ten thousand hours—many of them focused, happy hours—programming his computer as a teenager.

More typically, however, many of the ten thousand hours that eventually become the foundation of expertise are ones people would have been all too delighted to spend doing something else. As Ericsson and his co-authors note, truly effective practice time is actually quite demanding: You need a particular kind of practice—deliberate practice—to develop expertise. When most people practice, they focus on the things they already know how to do. Deliberate practice is different. It entails considerable, specific, and sustained efforts to do something you can’t do well—or even at all. Research across domains shows that it is only by working at what you can't do that you turn into the expert you want to become.”

In short, getting really good at something is difficult. It demands considerable patience and determination. And when trying to summon that determination, it’s probably not useful to think of your willingness to work hard as having been predetermined by chance events. Someone who thinks in those terms may be more tempted than others to sit back and watch fate take its course. In contrast, someone who thinks to himself “good people work hard and I’m a good person” may be more likely to summon the will to stay focused on a difficult task.

So it’s probably a useful psychological tendency to exaggerate the extent to which we can claim moral credit for the traits that make our own success more likely. But the utility of that psychological tendency doesn't alter the fact that someone with the inclination and capacity to work hard has been extremely lucky in this life.

How Winner-Take-All Markets Amplify Small Differences

Differences in talent and effort obviously help explain why some earn much more than others. But there is a second important dimension of the problem —namely the way labor markets translate such differences into differences in pretax incomes.

In textbook models of competitive labor markets, workers are paid the value of what they add to their employer’s bottom line. Everyday intuitions about how pay varies with performance follow the narrative suggested by these models reasonably well. If a firm sells bricks, for example, then a worker who produces 101 bricks an hour would be paid 1 percent more than another who produces only 100. But as the economist Philip Cook and I argued in our 1995 book, there are many labor markets in which the relationship between pay and ability has never followed this simple pattern."

One of the most conspicuous examples is the market for corporate executives. CEOs of the largest U.S. companies earned forty-two times as much as the average worker as recently as 1980, but by 2001 they were earning more than five hundred times as much,” even though there was no evidence suggesting that CEOs had become smarter or more hardworking than they used to be. Because the factors that have caused this explosive growth in earnings are similar to those at work in most other high-end labor markets, it’s instructive to review them in some detail. A close look at this market also provides an opportunity to weigh competing claims by Adam Smith and Charles Darwin about why unbridled competition often delivers outcomes that many find objectionable.

Many commentators on the left argue that the staggering growth in executive pay constitutes evidence of a breakdown in competitive market forces. Industrial behemoths conspire to drive out their rivals, we're told, so they can extort ever higher payments from captive customers. Executives pack their boards with cronies, who reward them with exorbitant salaries and bonuses.

To be sure, such abuses occur. But they’re no worse now than they've always been. On the contrary, improved communications and falling transportation costs have almost certainly made them less serious. Executive hiring committees may not be perfectly informed, but they have more information than they used to, and this makes reputation a more effective predictor of performance. Similarly, increased vigilance from institutional shareholders and growing threats of hostile takeovers have placed additional constraints on executive pay abuse.

Despite these advances, corporate governance remains imperfect. But although there will always be cases in which mediocre executive performances are rewarded with high salaries, those who fail to deliver generally get the axe more quickly than in the past. Philip Cook and I argued that top salaries have been growing sharply in virtually every labor market because of two factors—technological forces that greatly amplify small increments in performance and increased competition for the services of top performers.”

Pay by relative performance is one defining condition of what we call a winner-take-all market. A second is that rewards tend to be concentrated in the hands of a few top performers, with small differences in talent or effort often giving rise to enormous differences in incomes. Both features show up in Sherwin Rosen's description of the market for classical musicians:

The market for classical music has never been larger than it is now, yet the number of full-time soloists on any given instrument is on the order of only a few hundred (and much smaller for instruments other than voice, violin, and piano). Performers of the first rank comprise a limited handful out of these small totals and have very large incomes.

There are also known to be substantial differences between [their incomes and the incomes of] those in the second rank, even though most consumers would have difficulty detecting more than minor differences in a “blind” hearing."

The enormous leverage of the most talented musicians was made possible by the development of breathtakingly lifelike recording and playback technologies. Now that most music we listen to is prerecorded, the world’s best soprano can be literally everywhere at once. And since it costs no more to stamp out compact discs from her master recording than from the master recording of any other singer, millions of us are each willing to pay a few cents extra to hear her rather than other singers who are only marginally less able. The upshot is that the best soprano lands a seven-figure recording contract while only marginally less gifted performers struggle to get by.

The same logic holds in the market for leaders of large organizations. The trustees who recruited David J. Skorton as Cornell University’s twelfth president in 2007 knew that his most important responsibility would be to head the university's $4 billion capital campaign, which was then just getting under way. The hiring committee identified several candidates they felt would succeed in reaching that goal. They eventually decided, however, that none could have handled the task nearly as well as Skorton.

Having seen him in that role for the past several years, I find it easy to see why. Skorton, a man of great humor, warmth and charm, is a distinguished research cardiologist and an accomplished jazz musician. Alumni adore him. If his compellingly articulated vision of the university’s future persuades them to donate only 3 percent more than the next-best candidate would have, he will have boosted the university’s endowment by more than $100 million.

I don't know how much Dr. Skorton is paid. But many social critics expressed shock and outrage when it was reported that annual salaries of presidents of some private universities had passed the $1 million threshold several years ago. Leaders of David Skorton’s stature are in short supply, however—and because they're so valuable, the real surprise is that they’re not paid even more.

Vastly larger sums are at stake in many private companies. Consider a company with $io billion in annual earnings that has narrowed its CEO search to two finalists. If one would make just a handful of better decisions each year than the other, the company’s annual earnings might easily be 3 percent—or $300 million—higher under the better candidate's leadership. So if the top contenders for the CEO position are distinguishable with respect to the quality of the decisions they're likely to make in office, then the competitively determined salary of the best candidate can be dramatically higher than that for the second best, even when the estimated difference in their talents is small.

Decision leverage in the executive suite—always high in the largest companies—has grown sharply in recent decades. Perhaps the most important reason for this is the information revolution, which—together with falling transportation and tariff costs, recent developments in manufacturing technologies, and other factors—transformed many local and regional markets into national and global ones. A firm that produced the best tire in northern Ohio was once assured of being a player in at least its regional tire market, but sophisticated consumers now choose from among only a handful of the best tire producers worldwide. Corporate performance has always depended strongly on the efforts of a handful of people at the top, but because of the broader scope of today’s markets, the leaders of the surviving companies have much greater leverage than their earlier counterparts did.

In competitive markets, greater leverage means higher pay. As the economists Xavier Gabaix and Augustin Landier argue in a 2008 paper, for example, executive pay in a competitive market should vary in direct proportion to the market capitalization of the company.”” They found that CEO compensation in their sample of large companies grew sixfold between 1980 and 2003, roughly the same as the market-cap growth of these businesses.

Deregulation, which provides not only new market opportunities but also new competitive threats, has further enhanced the value of executive talent in the airline, trucking, banking, brokerage, and other industries in the United States. Adding to that has been the increased threat of outside takeovers resulting from the introduction of derivative securities and other new sources of financial capital. These developments have increased the potential gains from superior performance and also the potential damage from poor performance, making it all the more important to have the most talented players in key positions. For all these reasons, the economic value of top executive talent has been growing.

But increasing decision leverage alone cannot account for the observed growth in executive pay in the United States. After all, CEOs in America’s largest companies have always had enormous decision leverage, yet barely two decades have passed since the first multimillion-dollar compensation packages appeared. Moreover, globalization has increased the leverage of executives not just in the United States but also in Germany and Japan, where executive compensation has grown in recent years but remains modest by U.S. standards. So the mere fact that a top CEO contributes millions to a company’s bottom line does not by itself ensure a commensurate salary.

Before there can be large and concentrated rewards in any winner-takeall market, not only must the top performers generate high value, but there must also be effective competition for their services. In many markets, however, a variety of formal and informal rules traditionally prevented such competition.

Most major sports leagues, for example, once maintained restrictive agreements that prevented team owners from bidding for one another's most talented players. In the wake of the successful challenge of baseball’s reserve clause in 1976, however, these agreements have toppled one by one. By now, players have won at least limited free agency rights in all the major professional team sports. In each case, gaining these rights was followed by sharp increases in player compensation."

Unlike the owners of professional sports teams, the owners of business were never subject to formal sanctions against bidding for one another’s most talented employees. But informal norms often seemed to have virtually the same effect. Under these norms, it was once the almost universal practice to promote business executives from within. In most cases, there were only a few plausible internal candidates. Executive pay setting was thus a bilateral negotiation between the firm and the chosen internal candidate. That candidate had nowhere else to go, and the firm had no other viable candidates to consider. Under the circumstances, firms were able to retain top executives for less than one-tenth of today’s salaries.

The anti-raiding norms of business have all but completely unraveled. Perhaps the most celebrated case in point was IBM’s decision to hire Louis V. Gerstner, Jr., a respected corporate turnaround specialist who had produced record earnings at RJR Nabisco but had absolutely no experience in the computer industry. In earlier times, such cross-industry hires would have been almost unthinkable. But IBM’s gamble paid off handsomely. Gerstner led the then-struggling computer giant to its dramatic turnaround of the 1990s.”

This new spot market for executive talent has affected executive salaries in much the same way that free agency affected the salaries of professional athletes in recent decades. In our earlier study of CEOs hired by roughly eight hundred of the largest U.S. manufacturing and service companies, Philip Cook and I found a 50 percent increase in the proportion of outside hires between 1970 and 1992." That trend effectively broke the implicit reserve clause that once bound executives to their companies.

Although more than half of newly appointed CEOs are still insiders,” the game has now fundamentally changed. In the United States, leaving for an outside post has become an increasingly available option for the best performers. To hang onto its most valued senior officers, a firm must now pay them enough to keep them from jumping ship. Elimination of the reserve clause in baseball was an essential precondition for the explosive growth in the salaries of top players in recent years. Increased mobility has played a similar role in the market for top executives.

In short, the argument that skyrocketing executive pay is evidence of a breakdown of competitive forces does not withstand scrutiny. A conspicuous exception is the financial services industry, whose lavish campaign contributions appear to have purchased favorable regulatory treatment that has substantially insulated firms from effective competition.” But most of the spectacular pay increases of recent years are in fact a consequence of strengthening market forces.

Winner-take-all markets are nothing new, of course. What has changed is the pace at which technology has been extending the power and reach of the planet's most gifted performers. More than five hundred years ago, the printing press enabled a relatively few talented storytellers to displace millions of village raconteurs. More recently, the electronic newswire has allowed a small number of syndicated columnists to displace a host of local journalists. And the proliferation of personal computers has enabled a handful of software developers to replace thousands of local tax accountants. As a result of such changes, competitive labor markets now amplify individual differences in talent and effort into unprecedentedly large differences in pay. And since even differences in talent and effort stem in part from chance events over which we have little control, the upshot is that the relationship between luck and success is substantially stronger now than at any point in human history.

An enlightened libertarian might abandon the claim that all taxation was theft in favor of the less extreme claim that people have the right to after-tax incomes that closely mimic patterns in their pretax earnings. The latter claim might seem intuitively reasonable in a world in which someone who had 1 percent more talent, or who expended 1 percent more effort, earned 1 percent more income. But it has much less appeal in a world in which such tiny differences often translate into hundred- or thousandfold differences in earnings. And it’s the latter world we live in.

Beliefs Matter

Ideas have consequences. Inspired by the “It’s your money . . .” cognitive frame, the George W. Bush administration substantially reduced income taxes on the highest earners. To help reduce the resulting federal budget deficits, officials tried to cut whatever government expenditures they could. But government programs have constituents. The programs that end up getting cut are not necessarily the ones that deliver the least value. More often, they're the ones least visible to the public, or the ones whose constituents are least able to push back.

Among the programs cut during the Bush administration was the Energy Department's program to help lock down loose nuclear materials in the former Soviet Union.”' Those materials are stored in poorly fortified facilities staffed by soldiers who drink too much and are not always paid on time. Terrorists are desperately seeking to acquire nuclear materials. Under the circumstances, it’s not difficult to imagine them succeeding.

Viewed from the vantage point of someone at any station along the income scale, cutting that program was a bad decision. But such choices are all too common under our prevailing decision framework.

It costs money to round up poorly guarded nuclear materials in the former Soviet Union. If we want it to happen, we've got to pay for it, which means we must decide whom to tax. For reasons having nothing to do with social justice, I will argue in coming chapters that it would serve the interests of rich and poor alike to raise most of the additional revenue we need from those with higher incomes. But that won't happen unless we can adopt a new framework for thinking about taxes. Evidence on why people earn such different pretax incomes is clearly relevant for thinking about that framework.

The prevailing framework presumes that people have a natural right to keep the full bounty their talents and efforts command in the labor market. Given the extent to which incomes rest on public investment financed by taxes, that presumption has never made much sense. It’s further undercut by accumulating evidence on the profound extent to which the labor market success of even highly talented, hardworking people depends strongly on random events. And although there may be substantial psychological utility in the common tendency to claim moral credit for one’s own success, the fact remains that even talent and the capacity for hard work are themselves heavily dependent on factors over which we have limited control.

Marian Hossa, who played right wing for the Chicago Blackhawks during the team’s 2009-2010 Stanley Cup championship season, earned a salary of $8 million that year. Mr. Hossa, who was born on January 12, 1979, undoubtedly worked extremely hard to achieve his hockey success. I’ve never met him and have no idea how he feels about his current tax burden. But it’s easy to imagine that simply knowing about the link between early birthdays and hockey success might incline him to feel slightly less resentful about it.
