Chapter 12. The Libertarian’s Objections Reconsidered.

Different people have different visions of the good life. Although almost everyone values personal autonomy, for example, libertarians value it far more than most. Even the staunchest libertarian, however, chooses to sacrifice many valuable options every day in pursuit of others. If you're a salaried employee, you must adhere to someone else's schedule and do many things you may not feel like doing. Even if you're in business for yourself, your time is never completely your own. But you accept that fact, because the resulting income enables you to pursue a host of other valuable options.

In short, complete autonomy is an unattainable limiting case. The challenge for libertarians, as for others, is to achieve the most highly valued mix of options.

The direct effect of paying a tax—any tax—is to reduce your autonomy, because you can no longer use the same money for other things you want to do. That fact alone, however, does not mean that the tax diminishes the total value of your options. That would depend on a host of factors—most notably, on how the value of what’s purchased with the tax compares with the value of what you'd have bought with the same money. Notwithstanding the rhetorical force of “it’s your money . . .” slogans to the contrary, many public services deliver high value. And as we saw in the preceding chapter, many taxes confer the added benefit of discouraging activities that cause more harm than good.

As noted repeatedly, the primary source of our political paralysis in recent decades has been a collection of slogans that completely misrepresent the true nature of the actual choices we face. Although such slogans have come from diverse sources, many of the most damaging ones have come from antigovernment activists who insist that the state has no legitimate right to limit individual freedom in any way. Yet no rational person would want to live in a country in which people enjoyed complete freedom to do as they please.

My aim in this chapter will be to explore what sorts of state-imposed limitations on personal autonomy a rational libertarian ought to be willing to accept. By “rational libertarian” I have in mind a person who values personal autonomy intensely and ranks available options according to how well they fulfill her goals. I make no presumption about what those goals might be. A libertarian’s only aim, for example, might be to consume as much as possible, or amass the biggest fortune. But she might also want to assist others in need, or become a spiritual healer, or enter politics. The specific question then is, “If all options were open, what kind of society would a rational libertarian choose to join?”

The “rational” qualifier is important. Some people are content to reject arrangements that best serve their goals, on the grounds that they violate some abstract principle. The arguments I'll advance in this chapter will not persuade such people. But I believe they should persuade rational libertarians that the social institutions that would best promote their goals would closely resemble those we see in most modern industrial democracies. Many of those same institutions would of course be completely impermissible under libertarian dogma.

Coase Revisited

The framework suggested by the economist Ronald Coase, discussed at length in chapter 6, provides a useful way of thinking about the issues at hand. To recapitulate briefly, Coase began with the observation that activities that cause harm to others are reciprocal in nature. Tom may emit smoke that harms Sam, for example, but in most cases, harming Sam wasn’t Tom's intent. He was just trying to achieve his goals in the cheapest way possible. If we prevent Tom from emitting smoke, we harm Tom. Coase’s revolutionary insight was that Tom and Sam have a shared interest in minimizing the total harm suffered by both parties.

As discussed in chapter 6, careful study of Coase’s work leaves no doubt that he believed that practical barriers often prevent parties from negotiating private solutions to externalities. But the first step in his analysis was to ask how events would unfold in the absence of such barriers. What would happen, he asked, if there were no costs of negotiating, no costs of writing or enforcing contracts, and no other roadblocks that could prevent people from discussing how to solve their problems?

Coase argued that under such conditions, people would always implement efficient solutions. If the cost to Tom of removing the smoke were less than the harm to Sam, for example, he'd remove it, whether the law required him to or not. If the law did not hold Tom liable for damages, he'd be free to pollute with impunity. But rather than see that happen, it would be in Sam's interest to pay Tom to remove the smoke.

Alternatively, if it were less costly for Sam to escape the damage by moying upwind, then he'd move. If the law held Tom liable for smoke damage, Sam could stay put and be reimbursed for whatever injury he suffered. But in that case, it would be cheaper for Tom to pay Sam to move.

The important point is that failure to agree to the most efficient solution would leave each party worse off. The Coase framework casts in sharp relief an underappreciated link between efficiency and autonomy. Because this link is important, it will facilitate discussion to state it explicitly:

Personal autonomy will always be compromised unless all problems stemming from activities that cause harm to others are resolved efficiently.

An Illustrative Example

A simple example demonstrates why this must be so, and in the process helps clarify what it means to solve a problem efficiently. Suppose that Tom and Sam are considering whether to share a two-bedroom apartment that rents for $3,000 a month. Their alternative is for each to rent a one-bedroom apartment for $2,000 a month. Rent aside, they be indifferent between the two options except for the fact that Tom is a smoker and Sam dislikes being exposed to smoke. If they lived in separate apartments, this problem would not arise. So the question is whether the rent savings from sharing an apartment would be sufficient to compensate for the smoke problem.

To answer that question, we'll need to know how strongly Tom feels about being able to smoke and how strongly Sam feels about living in a smoke-free environment. As discussed in chapter 7, the best available metric for assessing the strength of such feelings is the amount they'd be willing to pay for what they want. Let’s suppose that Tom would be willing to pay $800 a month rather than abstain from smoking at home and that living in a smoke-free environment is worth $1,600 a month to Sam. (For the sake of simplicity, I'll take these assessments at face value, ignoring the possibility that Tom might welcome an incentive to give up smoking.)

The two men confront a standard cost-benefit problem. By sharing a two-bedroom apartment, their $3,000 in total monthly rent would be $1,000 lower than the combined rent they'd pay for separate one-bedroom apartments. The benefit of living together is thus $1,000 a month. What's the cost? Since being able to smoke in the apartment is worth only $800 a month to Tom but would cause $1,600 a month in damage to Sam, the efficient solution if they share living space would be for Tom not to smoke at home. His cost of making that accommodation is $800 a month, the amount he'd be willing to pay to continue smoking. So the cost of sharing living space is $800 a month.

Since the benefit of living together is $1,000 a month and the cost is only $800, they'll have an additional economic surplus of $200 to divide if they share the two-bedroom apartment under an agreement that prevents Tom from smoking at home. If they decide to split that surplus equally, they'll apportion the rent so that each man ends up $100 a month better off than he'd have been by living alone.

Since Sam is indifferent between living alone and living together, except for the smoke problem, he'd be $100 a month better off in the two-bedroom apartment if his share of the rent were $1,900 (since that's $100 less than he'd pay for a one-bedroom apartment, where he'd also be smoke-free). Tom, for his part, would be $100 a month better off in the two-bedroom apartment if his share of the rent were $1,100. That’s $900 less than he'd pay in a one-bedroom apartment, but he'd need $800 of that savings to compensate for the fact that he can no longer smoke at home.

As discussed in chapter 7, these valuations typically depend in part on how much income the parties have. In this example, Sam might have been willing to pay more to avoid smoke than Tom was willing to pay to continue smoking simply because Sam had more income than Tom. Critics on the left often object to the cost-benefit test because it employs valuations that depend on people’s ability to pay. Why, they ask, should rich people be advantaged in this way? The answer, as we saw in chapter 7, is that participants themselves get outcomes they like better when costs and benefits are measured by willingness to pay. Using any other valuations could preclude transactions that both parties would want to go forward.

For example, suppose a dictator decreed that differences in willingness to pay based on income differences be ignored in decisions like the one facing Tom and Sam. If the two men had been required to split the rent equally for a shared apartment, Tom would never have agreed to share living space in the first place. Rather than pay $1,500 a month to share a two-bedroom apartment in which he couldn't smoke, he'd have preferred to live alone for $2,000.

Sharing the two-bedroom apartment on the terms described creates a clear gain for each party. There’s no coherent sense in which those terms could be said to violate anyone's rights. After all, each man had the right to live alone, so could have easily avoided the arrangement if he'd wanted to. It would thus make no sense for Tom to complain that he no longer has the option of smoking at home. That’s true, but he received more than adequate compensation for that fact by saving $900 a month in rent. Nor would it make sense for Sam to complain that he’s paying an unfairly high share of the rent. Tom needed to give up something he valued to make the joint living arrangement worthwhile, and he wouldn't have agreed to do that if Sam’s share of the rent had been significantly smaller.

In light of the alternatives they faced, an arrangement like the one described—compromises and all—creates the maximum possible degree of autonomy for the two men. Autonomy is about being able to do what you want to do. The shared living arrangement doesn’t require Sam to give up anything he values. And by putting an additional $100 a month in his pocket, it makes the list of things he can do longer than before. Tom's agreement not to smoke at home was a significant sacrifice in his eyes, yes. But he received something he valued even more in return—namely an extra $900 a month to spend. So while the list of things he can now do is missing an important element, it has additional elements that he considers more valuable than the one he gave up. So he, too, enjoys greater autonomy.

The point I stress from this example is that it’s in everyone’s interest to arrive at efficient solutions to any problem that stems from activities that cause harm to others. It doesn’t matter what the problem is. It can be smoke. It can be noise. Or it can be a positional arms race for access to the best schools. It doesn’t matter who the actors are. They can be Republicans or Democrats, Catholics or Protestants, high school dropouts or college graduates. They can be rational libertarians or Tea Party members.

The example just discussed highlights the importance of Coase’s observation that externalities are reciprocal. Tom, who wants to smoke at home, is not a perpetrator. Sam, who wants smoke-free living quarters, is not a victim. The two simply confront a problem that it is in their interest to solve as cheaply as they can. Until people implement efficient solutions to the problems confronting them, it will always be possible to rearrange things so that each person has a new list of options that she likes better than the one she had before—in short, so that everyone has more autonomy. Again, efficiency is a prerequisite for maximum autonomy.

A Thought Experiment

With that point in mind, let’s consider some specific examples of the kinds of regulations a rational libertarian might willingly embrace. Astute readers may have noticed that the apartment-sharing example resembles the societyformation example discussed in chapter 8. As in the earlier exercise, let's again imagine that you and 999 others have just emerged from an ark after an epic flood that destroyed all existing social arrangements. Your assignment is to form societies and begin civilization anew.

The terms of this exercise are again designed to be maximally advantageous to persons who care strongly about personal autonomy. Most important, membership in each new society is strictly voluntary. No one can make you join a society against your wishes, and the rules of each society will be enacted only in accordance with procedures to which each and every member of that society has agreed.

You, a rational libertarian, and the 999 others represent a random sample from the distribution of human talent and temperament. You and a much smaller number of others like you are from the extreme tail of that distribution in terms of your desire for autonomy. By temperament, you're extreme libertarians, but you're not ideologues. If you join a society that limits your freedom of action, it will be only because you saw it as in your interest to accept those limits.

As before, every society that forms is entitled to a proportional share of the land and other property that survived the flood. A society composed of one hundred persons, for example, would constitute 10 percent of the world’s population and would thus claim 10 percent of all existing land and other property. How that property is to be distributed is for the members themselves to resolve. They might give everyone an equal share. Or they might distribute only a small portion of the property in advance, and then allow members to purchase the rest with whatever money they receive under the distribution rules they adopt. Or they could form a society in which all property was held in common in perpetuity. All options are on the table.

Talent and temperament are again assumed to be perfectly observable, so you'd know whom you'd be joining. Once you and others agree to form a society, you're free to earn as much as your efforts and abilities permit under the rules adopted.

As discussed in chapter 8, important outcomes hinge on the identities of those you choose to join. If most of them were highly productive, your society would be able to purchase more and better public goods than would be possible if they were less productive. But there would also be a downside, which is that you'd be at a disadvantage in the bidding for positional goods. Only a fraction of the home sites in any society have views, for example, and if most people find views desirable, you'd be unlikely to get one if you were one of society's least productive members.

In chapter 8, I argued that such considerations would be only one among many factors that might incline people to favor some degree of progressivity in the tax systems they adopt. Ifa rational libertarian wants to form a society with less productive others, thereby to gain advantage in the bidding for positional goods, those others might respond by demanding compensation through the tax system. It would then be up to the libertarian to decide whether joining on those terms was attractive.

In light of the dismal history of the communist and other collectivist economies, participants in this exercise might well agree to relegate the production of most goods and services to private markets. But as we saw in chapter 9, income prospects in competitive markets are inherently uncertain. Minuscule differences in talent or performance and seemingly unimportant random events often give rise to enormous differences in market rewards. Reflecting on that fact, even a rational libertarian might wish to consider supplementing market incomes with some form of social safety net. Once members have agreed to the institutions and governing rules for their societies, however, they're free to spend their incomes as they wish.

I note in passing that this exercise is in at least one important respect very different from the famous thought experiment proposed by the moral philosopher John Rawls. Rawls asked readers to imagine themselves behind a veil of ignorance that shielded them from knowing what their own talents and temperaments were. He argued that distribution rules chosen from behind such a veil would be presumptively fair, since people wouldn't know which particular rules would work to their advantage. Rawls argued that rules chosen under these circumstances would permit an increase in income inequality only if it served to raise the income of society’s poorest member. Although others have argued that most people behind a veil of ignorance would permit more inequality than that, there is broad agreement that the Rawlsian thought experiment provides a strong rationale for taking aggressive steps to limit inequality.

One could argue that the exercise I propose is unfair because people know their talent levels in advance and therefore have the power to exclude those unlucky enough to be born without much talent. It’s a cogent objection. But unlike the Rawlsian exercise, the purpose of mine isn't to describe what a fair society would look like. It's to describe what kind of society a rational libertarian would choose to join. I make no claim that society should be structured to resemble one that a rational libertarian would want to join. Rather, my claim is that such a society would be strikingly similar to the modern welfare state.

Might the mythical John Galt, protagonist of Ayn Rand’s novel Atlas Shrugged, voluntarily join a society like that? Rand said she wrote her novel “to show how desperately the world needs prime movers and how viciously it treats them.”” But the exercise I’m proposing puts libertarian prime movers in the catbird’s seat. John Galt would have no reason to fear vicious treatment. But even though the exercise is stacked heavily in his favor, the power it accords him is primarily defensive in nature. He can avoid distasteful terms that others might want to impose on him. But he cannot dictate terms to others.

Practical Reasons for Compromise

At the outset, a rational libertarian will dismiss out of hand the movement libertarian’s claim that all taxation is theft. In addition to national defense, a host of other goods that we value can’t be produced, or can't be produced well, by the private sector. Private toll roads are economical under some circumstances, for example, but erecting tollbooths at every intersection of a dense urban grid would be impractical. It’s much more effective to have government build and maintain those roads with tax revenue. A rational libertarian will also accept the fact that taxation must be mandatory. Voluntary tax contributions would generate nowhere near enough revenue to provide the public goods and services we want.

The most compelling reason for a rational libertarian to consider compromise in this exercise is the advantage inherent in larger populations. As discussed in chapter 8, for example, a common feature of many public goods is that they must be provided in the same quantity and quality for all citizens. The more citizens there are to share their costs, the cheaper they become for everyone. A rational libertarian might thus choose to join others in a society even if he knew they favored a somewhat different mix of public goods and services than he did. The obvious downside would be that he'd have to make tax payments to support some public goods he didn't favor. But there would also be a larger population to share the cost of the public goods he wanted, which might make his taxes lower on balance.

John Galt and kindred spirits might dream of a society populated only by prime movers like themselves, for there would then be no need for compromise. On brief reflection, however, they'd surely have second thoughts. Whod launder their shirts in a society like that? Whod respond when their houses caught fire? Whod collect their garbage? Having to spend a good portion of their days performing such tasks for themselves would actually constitute a serious sacrifice in autonomy.

One of Adam Smith’s most profound insights was that production often grows explosively when we divide tasks and specialize. Consider, for example, his widely quoted account of how specialization led to a severalhundredfold increase in productivity in an eighteenth-century Scottish pin factory:

One man draws out the wire, another straightens it, a third cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving the head; to make the head requires two or three distinct operations... . Ihave seen a small manufactory of this kind where only ten men were employed . . . [who] could, when they exerted themselves, make among them about twelve pounds of pins in a day. There are in a pound upwards of four thousand pins of middling size. Those ten persons, therefore, could make among them upwards of forty-eight thousand pins in a day. Each person, therefore, making a tenth part of forty-eight thousand pins, might be considered as making four thousand eight hundred pins in a day. But if they had all wrought separately and independently, and without any of them having been educated to this peculiar business, they certainly could not each of them have made twenty, perhaps not one pin in a day.’

But Smith also realized that the full advantages of such specialization are possible only with sufficient population density. Thus, he wrote,

As it is the power of exchanging that gives occasion to the division of labour, so the extent of this division must always be limited by the extent of that power, or, in other words, by the extent of the market. ...

In the lone houses and very small villages which are scattered about in so desert a country as the highlands of Scotland, every farmer must be butcher, baker, and brewer, for his own family. In such situations we can scarce expect to find even a smith, a carpenter, or a mason, within less than twenty miles of another of the same trade. The scattered families that live at eight or ten miles distance from the nearest of them, must learn to perform themselves a great number of little pieces of work, for which, in more populous countries, they would call in the assistance of those workmen. ... A country carpenter . . . is not only a carpenter, but a joiner, a cabinet-maker, and even a carver in wood, as well as a wheel-wright, a plough-wright, a cart and waggon-maker.*

I'm assuming, plausibly, that libertarians constitute only a small proportion of the thousand people charged with forming new societies in this exercise. Even if the number of people involved in the exercise were considerably larger, John Galt would relegate himself to a very small society indeed if he were unwilling to join one that included people with views different from his own. Unless we're willing to dismiss the logic of Adam Smith’ claim that division and specialization of labor constitute the foundation of economic prosperity, we're forced to conclude that a society consisting only of staunch libertarians would also be a very poor society, at least in comparison to others with significantly larger populations.

Would John Galt Agree to a Mandatory Savings Program?

With that fact in mind, let’s confront John Galt with the decision of whether to join a group whose members share his views except for those on one particular issue, the question of whether to adopt a mandatory savings program. The group wants to raise all tax rates 10 percent and deposit the additional revenue in savings accounts for each citizen that would be accessible only after retirement. They favor this program not because they believe themselves to be shortsighted or irrational. Nor is it their aim to make life more difficult for libertarians. Rather, they want the program because they believe it will mitigate the consequences of a positional arms race for houses in neighborhoods served by good schools.

As noted repeatedly, a good school is a relative concept. It’s one that is better than other schools in the same environment. Most parents want their children to attend such schools, but only 50 percent of all students can attend schools in the top half of the quality distribution at any moment, no matter how much parents bid for houses in good school districts.

The upshot is that young parents confront a painful dilemma. They can save enough while young to support a comfortable standard of living in retirement, or they can use most of their savings to bid for a house in a better school district. The problem, as discussed earlier, is that when all raid their savings, they succeed only in bidding up the price of access to good schools. The group wants to mitigate this problem by placing part of their current income in savings accounts that are beyond their reach until retirement.

Let’s suppose John Galt and his fellow libertarians are initially offended by the very idea of this proposal. Ignoring Coase'’s insight that externalities are reciprocal, they ask, “What right does the government have to force us to save?” The others, however, are unmoved by the objection and declare their intention to go ahead with the plan, with or without the libertarians. I'll suppose that there’s no other large group Galt and his friends could join that would reject this proposal. Their choice, then, is to form a small society on their own in which they retain the right to decide for themselves how much to save each month, or else join a much larger society in which they'd be forced to save at least a certain amount each month.

If they joined the larger society, they'd be able to share the costs of public goods and services with more people. Also, the mandatory savings tax isn't like other taxes, because the money would be invested in accounts with their names on them. At retirement, they'd get every cent back, plus the compound interest that had accumulated. Because of greater division and specialization of labor, they'd also enjoy substantially higher pretax incomes. In all probability, then, their after-tax incomes would be substantially higher in the larger society. If their weekly income net of the savings tax and all other taxes would be higher if they joined the larger society, on what grounds could it be rational for them not to?

To protect their autonomy? That would indeed be a strange conception of autonomy. If they'd have more disposable income in the larger society (even neglecting the fact that they'd be getting the mandatory savings deposits back at retirement), and no additional restrictions, they'd actually have much more autonomy in the larger society.

Safety Regulation

The same logic would apply if the only disagreement were that the larger group wanted to regulate workplace safety. Galt and his friends might point out that such regulations would deprive them of the right to decide for themselves whether to accept additional risk for higher pay. Yes, but the larger group doesn't desire these restrictions because they're know-it-all busybodies. They want them because of the fundamental Darwinian conflict between individual and group incentives with respect to risky choices. As discussed in chapter 3, riskier jobs pay more because safety devices cost money. So if some workers accept riskier jobs, they’re able to increase their bidding for houses in better school districts, a trade that makes perfect sense to them as individuals. Yet when all make the same move, the result they'd hoped for doesn't materialize. As when people deplete their savings, the end result is simply to bid up the prices of houses in the better school districts.

Galt and his friends remain skeptical. The fact remains, however, that the proportion of people who want to regulate safety is much higher than the proportion who don't. Because a larger society can achieve greater division and specialization of labor and share the cost of public goods more broadly, its hardly fanciful to imagine that the after-tax wage in the safer jobs in the larger society would actually be higher than the after-tax wage in the more dangerous jobs in the smaller society that doesn't regulate safety.

Galt and his friends may still refuse to join, claiming that autonomy matters more than anything else to them. But in so doing, they will have revealed themselves to be irrational. No rational persons who value autonomy above all else would choose an option under which they enjoy considerably less autonomy than they could have had. The safer jobs in the larger society would have made them less likely to lose their autonomy to crippling accidents. The higher after-tax incomes in the larger society would have broadened their options in countless other ways. they'd have had more choices about where to vacation, more choices about where to go out for dinner. they'd have had the options of working fewer hours each week, or of retiring earlier. And so on.

There are many competing definitions of rationality in philosophy and economics. But almost all versions of the concept require that a rational person pursue his goals in the most efficient manner available. If Galt and his friends opt for lower autonomy because they’re unwilling to yield to the majority's positions on issues like savings or safety, we're forced to conclude either that they’re irrational or else that they don't really value autonomy nearly as much as they claim to.

What about Rights?

“People have rights” is the opening sentence in Anarchy, State, and Utopia, the philosopher Robert Nozick’s landmark defense of the libertarian position. Many libertarians will object that my exercise demonstrates only that majorities often have the power to run roughshod over minorities. Majorities often do have that power, to be sure. To prevent them from abusing it, the constitutions of all successful civilizations enshrine many specific individual rights. No country, for example, grants anyone the right to kill you, or steal your car, or prevent you from voting. Many societies grant wide latitude for public speech, even when people say things that deeply offend the majority. But giving the majority what it wants is not always, or even generally, a violation of anyone's rights.

Again, regulations are data. No country has chosen to make it unconstitutional to regulate savings. Nor has any country declared it unconstitutional to regulate safety. Those observations may tell us something. If libertarians want to assert that people have a right to be exempt from such regulations, they must accept the burden of explaining where that right comes from.

Someone is going to be disadvantaged no matter which way these contested issues are resolved. In the case of savings, for example, refusal to regulate means that many will enter retirement with insufficient savings. But if we regulate savings, some will be forced to save more than they wish to. In the case of safety, refusal to regulate means that some will feel compelled to take excessive risks. But if we regulate, some will have to buy more safety than they want to. If libertarians insist that concern for the second group in each case should trump concern for the first, they must explain why.

Deciding whether to join a society with others who favor some rules you don't like is obviously different from deciding whether to share an apartment with someone who smokes. But for present purposes, the decisions have two important elements in common. Note first the importance of economies of scale in each. Sharing space with others—either in an apartment or in a society—typically entails having to compromise, but the resulting cost savings can easily make those compromises worth accepting.

Second, note that in both examples, monetary valuations provide the common metric for identifying the most efficient ways to limit harm. As discussed in chapter 7, these valuations typically depend in part on how much income the parties have. But given their incomes, it’s those valuations that should be used for assigning weights. As noted earlier, using any other valuations could preclude transactions that all parties would want to go forward.

Some libertarians may object that the Coase framework’s emphasis on cost-benefit analysis isn't necessarily appropriate for all matters pertaining to human rights. Perhaps so. But we're not talking about all matters pertaining to human rights. We're talking about everyday public policy decisions, each one of which typically has only a small impact on anyone’s lifetime wealth.

People are long-lived creatures. During a typical lifetime, everyone will be affected by literally tens of thousands of public policy decisions. Taking only those actions whose benefits exceed their costs doesn’t guarantee that each person will receive net benefits from every policy adopted. Every change generates both winners and losers. But if the cost-benefit test is the decision rule, virtually everyone will come out a net winner in the long run. It’s like taking a favorable gamble thousands of times. Heads you win $4, tails you lose $3. You could lose several times in a row. But if the coin is unbiased and you flip it thousands of times, you're virtually certain to come out ahead.

Would anyone be unfairly disadvantaged by using the cost-benefit test as society's decision rule? Since costs and benefits are measured by willingness to pay, the preferences of people with higher incomes tend to receive greater weight, because high-income people are generally willing to pay more for what they want. That could be a problem if the things they want are systematically different from what others want, which is undoubtedly so in many domains.

As discussed in chapter 7, however, if low-income people have the power to reject the cost-benefit approach—as they could in this exercise by refusing to join any society that proposed to use it—they could always do better by accepting it in return for additional income transfers. And because having a larger, more diverse society makes increased division and specialization of labor possible, it would be in the interest of others to make that concession. But once the bargain was struck, willingness to pay would be the relevant metric for weighing different alternatives.

The bottom line is that if society’s rules don’t make the total economic pie as large as possible, they squander an opportunity to enhance the personal autonomy of every citizen. Again, when the economic pie is larger, it’s always possible for everyone to have a larger slice than before, and that means having the option to do more things.

Libertarians would thus have cogent reasons for agreeing to form broader coalitions than they could if they excluded others with different views. The advantage would be that per-capita incomes would be significantly higher than in the necessarily smaller coalitions consisting only of libertarians. they'd have to abide by rules that eliminate certain options or make them more expensive, as in the examples of mandatory savings and safety regulation just discussed. But they'd also enjoy many new options. If the new ones were of greater value than those sacrificed, as they almost surely would be in the context of the savings and safety examples, it would be irrational for libertarians not to join.

People are not, of course, free to form new societies whenever it suits them. As a practical matter, almost everyone is born into an existing society, and it would be a formidable hurdle indeed to try to organize a new one. Life as we know it is thus like the second variant of Coase’s framework, in which transaction costs make it impractical to negotiate efficient private solutions to problems caused by externalities. In such cases, Coase suggested, society should define property rights and adopt institutions that would steer parties toward the solutions they'd have agreed to among themselves if negotiation had been practical.

Here again, his framework emphasizes the importance of efficiency. It suggests, for example, that if one group wants to regulate workplace safety but another doesn't, the question should be resolved by comparing how much the opposing sides are willing to pay to have things their way.

Safety regulations have their greatest impact on workers at the lower end of the income scale. Libertarian prime movers like John Galt typically work under much safer conditions than those required by regulation. Rational libertarians should thus be willing to pay very little to avoid safety regulation. And since the workers who favor safety regulation greatly outnumber the libertarians who oppose it, the cost-benefit test would almost surely rule in favor of safety regulation.

Libertarians might object that it violates their right to decide for themselves how much safety to buy. But defending that right means denying others the right to limit the amount of risk they permit themselves to take. Libertarians need to explain why the first right is more important to defend than the second.

If rational libertarians would indeed have chosen to join the larger group that wanted safety regulation in a world with zero transaction costs, how can they then insist that safety regulation robs them of an essential right? The high transaction costs of the world we live in mean that one group or the other will not be able to get what it wants. What argument can libertarians offer to explain why wishes of the larger group should be discounted? How could a group that claims to celebrate freedom above all else argue for a result that people never would have endorsed in an environment in which everyone had complete freedom of choice? Could there possibly be some other framework for thinking about rights that would be more congenial to a libertarian’s ear than Coase’s framework? What would it be? A religious text? If so, which one?

A Libertarian Welfare State?

A rational libertarian who reflects carefully about the traditional libertarian position will find it difficult to defend. I have granted every traditional libertarian assumption—that markets are perfectly competitive, that consumers are essentially rational, and that government may not restrict behavior except to prevent undue harm to others. To this list I have added only one substantive element—namely the completely uncontroversial observation that many important aspects of life are graded on the curve. It’s that observation that causes the traditional libertarian position to collapse.

The link between reward and relative performance underlies the divergence between Adam Smith’s view of the competitive process and Charles Darwin’s—or, more accurately, the divergence between Smith’s modern disciples’ view and Darwin's. The former believe that competitive forces channel greedy individuals to behave in ways that produce maximum advantage for society as a whole. Darwin, in contrast, understood that competition molded behavior in ways that benefit the individual. As we saw in chapter 2, such behaviors sometimes benefit society as a whole, but not always. In particular, when individual payoffs depend on relative position, individual and collective interests generally diverge.

If positional competition, not exploitation by powerful employers, is what leads workers to accept excessive risk, libertarians cannot argue that safety regulation robs them of their right to choose individually. Intelligent libertarians know better than to object to a military arms control agreement on the grounds that it limits signatories’ freedom to build as many bombs as they want to. That’s the explicit rationale for such agreements. Those who sign them realize they'll build too many bombs if they’re free to choose individually. Safety regulation is a positional arms control agreement, so of course it limits individual choice. That’s exactly what those whose own choices it limits want it to do!

In arenas in which reward depends on relative performance, we invariably see positional arms races. And almost without exception, participants adopt positional arms control agreements that limit what would otherwise be mutually offsetting expenditures. As noted earlier, auto racing associations limit engine displacement; sports leagues impose roster limits; school districts impose mandatory kindergarten start dates; and so on. To object to such constraints on the grounds that they limit individual freedom is to miss the point entirely.

Some libertarians insist that relative position isn’t very important to most people. But that’s a losing argument. Even a minimally competent and informed debater could demolish it without effort. Libertarians must eventually concede that relative position matters, but many may still want to insist that it shouldn't. They'll object that allowing public policy to be shaped by positional concerns would be to legitimize and encourage negative emotions like jealousy and envy. We discount the preferences of sadists and masochists in the design of public policy, they'll say, and we should also discount any preferences that stem from jealousy and envy.

But that’s a losing argument, too, because positional concerns exist quite apart from such emotions. It’s an incontestable property of the human nervous system that evaluation is shaped by context. Unless a car is faster than most other cars in the same local environment, it won't seem fast. If a house is significantly smaller than most other houses in a local environment, it will seem small, irrespective of its absolute size. As we saw in chapter 5, when context shapes evaluation more in some domains than others, spending patterns are distorted. People spend too much on context-sensitive categories like houses, jewelry, and cars, and too little on less context-sensitive categories like safety, savings, and leisure. Those same distortions would be present in a world completely devoid of jealousy or envy.

Libertarians might continue to insist that progressive taxation violates their rights. But as we saw in chapter 8, any other form of taxation would deprive the most prosperous members of society of the mix of public and private goods and services they'd most prefer. Libertarians might insist that higher taxes on the most prosperous members of society will make the economic pie smaller. But as we saw in chapter 10, there is little evidence for that position. On the contrary, as we saw in chapter 11, a well-designed tax system actually makes the economic pie larger, by discouraging behaviors that cause more harm than good. If we all spent a little less on weddings and coming-of-age parties, the people we celebrate would still feel just as special. If we all discharged fewer tons of CO, into the atmosphere, we could reduce the odds of catastrophic global climate change.

As John Stuart Mill maintained, the government may legitimately restrict individual behavior to prevent undue harm to others. But heavy-handed regulation is almost never the most effective means to that end. As our experience with pollution taxes has demonstrated, it’s generally better to discourage harmful behavior by making it more expensive than by prohibiting it outright. Society's interest lies in reducing the total amount of harmful behavior, not in reducing harmful behavior by specific individuals. The tax approach keeps total costs to a minimum while restricting options as little as possible, because it concentrates harm reduction in the hands of those who accomplish it most cheaply.

Antitax, antigovernment rhetoric has prevented us from taking greater advantage of that simple insight. As we saw in chapter 4, some countries have reasonably honest governments that reliably deliver valued public goods and services. Every rational person would want to live under such a government. But good government doesn’t just happen. It must be nurtured carefully. Starve-the-beast rhetoric surely hasn't helped us forge the kind of society most of us want to live in.

We need good government because individual and societal goals are often squarely in conflict. When they are, it’s naive to expect an invisible hand to produce good outcomes. The good news is that intelligent tax policy can often guide us to better outcomes unintrusively. Simply by taxing behaviors that cause harm to others, we could easily afford to maintain our roads and bridges without having to make any painful sacrifices in private consumption.

Although the traditional libertarian position does not withstand careful scrutiny, I was never under any illusion that theories or evidence would compel committed ideologues to change their minds. But in writing this book, my hope was that it might persuade at least some antigovernment activists to rethink their uncritical opposition to collective action. There remains a pivotal role in public debate for those who care most passionately about personal autonomy. Almost no one wants a government that tries to regulate every behavior that somebody, somewhere, might find annoying. A truly effective government would focus only on behaviors that cause real harm that others cannot easily avoid on their own. It would try to discourage those behaviors with the lightest touch possible.

To have a government like that would be to have a successful libertarian welfare state. To get there, we'll need a new generation of libertarians who are willing to accept legitimate restraints on their own behavior, while continuing to battle ferociously to prevent government from intruding any more than necessary.

Every generation has had its doomsayers. But unlike those of previous generations, who were mostly religious fanatics, ours are the planet’s most distinguished scientists. They tell us there’s a good chance we'll burn up if we don't act forcefully and quickly to reverse global warming. The policy instrument that would accomplish that goal is simple and well understood— essentially some variant of a stiff carbon tax. The costs wed have to bear would be modest. Yet it appears we'll take no action.

What stands in our way are antitax, antigovernment zealots driven by a philosophy that, on close examination, collapses under its own weight. They're in control of the conversation at the moment, but they’re not invincible. Win or lose, we should fight them. Looking back on it all, would you feel comfortable if you hadn't?

Cynical friends caution that I’m naive to believe we can do better. I’m just tilting at windmills, they say. Perhaps. But as Cervantes reminds us in the words of Don Quixote, “Too much sanity may be madness—and the maddest of all—to see life as it is, and not as it ought to be.”®
