Chapter 11. Taxing Harmful Activities.

A tax on any activity NOT ONLY generates revenue, it also discour- A ages the activity. That simple observation constitutes welcome news indeed, for not only do we desperately need additional tax revenue right now, but our economy is also bedeviled by a host of harmful activities. Taxes levied on those activities would kill two birds with one stone, helping to bring government budgets into balance while discouraging activities that cause more harm than good.

Pigouvian Taxes

Before discussing specific examples, it will be useful to flesh out the economic logic behind the claim that the tax approach often leads to better results than attempts to regulate harmful activities directly. The basic argument was first made by the British economist A. C. Pigou, for whom taxes on harmful activities came to be known as Pigouvian taxes.!

Imagine two companies, Limpio and Sucio, that are the sole sources of sulfur dioxide (SO2) pollution in a valley region. Each company has three possible technologies it could employ. In each case, the technologies differ only in terms of their operating costs and the amounts of SO2 they emit. Those costs and the corresponding levels of SO2 emissions are as summarized in Table 11.1. Take a moment to look over the pattern of the entries in TABLE II.1 Operating Costs and SO2 Emissions for Different Production Processes

Cleanest process Intermediate process _Dirtiest process (0 tons of SO2/day) (3 tons of SO2/day) (6 tons of SO2/day)

Limpio Corporation's $100 $40 $10 daily operating cost

Sucio Corporation's daily operating cost $4,500 $1,500 $500

the table, which illustrate some important general properties of different methods for dealing with harm abatement.

Note first, for example, that as you read from right to left across the cost entries, the cleaner production processes are also the more expensive ones. That's a simple consequence of the fact that better filters are more costly than less effective ones. Note also that the cost of removing a given amount of pollution—in this case, each 3-ton daily increment—rises as more pollution is removed. That's because rational economic actors always avail themselves of the most cost-effective options first, and then move on to less attractive ones. For instance, the cost to Limpio of removing the first 3 tons of SO2 from its smokestacks each day is just $30 (the difference between the cost of its dirtiest process and its intermediate one), while its cost of removing the next 3 tons is $60 a day (the cost difference between its cleanest and intermediate processes).

Another important pattern illustrated by the production cost entries is that removing pollution is more costly for some firms than others. Note, for example, that it would cost Sucio $1,000 a day to remove the first 3 tons of SO2 and $3,000 a day to remove the remaining 3 tons—much more in each case than the corresponding cost for Limpio.

Let’s assume, plausibly, that it’s impractical for those who are damaged by SO2 emissions to negotiate with polluters. A standard assumption in economics is that firms try to maximize their profits, which implies they'll choose the cheapest production method the law allows. In the absence of regulation, then, each company would use its cheapest (and dirtiest) process, which would result in a total of 12 tons of daily SO2 emissions, 6 from each company.

Why the Optimal Pollution Level Is Generally Not Zero

What level of SO2 emissions would be optimal for this valley? Many noneconomists are quick to say zero, but we cannot answer this question without knowing the costs imposed by SO2 emissions. Reducing emissions is also costly, after all, and if the damage caused by SO2 were sufficiently low, the best outcome would be just to tolerate it. But to make the discussion more interesting, let’s imagine that SO2 emissions cause damage at a constant rate of $40 per ton each day. Total damage would thus be $480 per day if each firm used its dirtiest process.

Limpio, as noted, can reduce SO2 emissions far more cheaply than Sucio. That means the cheapest first step in reducing total damage would be for Limpio to switch from its dirtiest process to its intermediate one. The move would increase daily total production costs by only $30, and since that’s smaller than the $120 savings from reduced emission damages, it would clearly be a step worth taking. To reduce damage further, the cheapest next step would be for Limpio to switch from its intermediate to its cleanest process, which would cut emissions by another 3 tons a day and increase daily production costs by $60. Since daily emissions damage would again fall by $120, this step would also be worth taking. But at that point, Limpio will have done all it can.

If we wanted to reduce damage any further, the next step would be for Sucio to switch from its dirtiest to its intermediate process. But taking that step would cost $1,000 a day, far more than the resulting reduction of $120 a day in damages. In this example, Sucio’s abatement costs are so high that it has no useful role to play in the cleanup effort. A total of 6 tons a day of SO2 emissions is the best we can do here.

Many people find it difficult to accept that a nonzero level of pollution could be optimal. But that must be true whenever emissions reduction beyond some point becomes more costly than the corresponding reduction in damages. If someone insists that the optimal level of every pollutant in every environment is zero, ask him why he isn't at home vacuuming his living room at this very moment. Every minute that passes since the last time it was vacuumed, more dust accumulates. If he insists the optimal level of dust is zero, he should vacuum continuously, or hire someone to do so.

But of course that would be silly. Vacuuming consumes valuable time, and a little bit of dust doesn't do much damage. The same logic dictates that zero is also generally not the optimal level of other types of pollutants. An optimal pollution abatement program employs the cheapest abatement methods first, then works its way down the list until the value of additional abatement no longer justifies its cost.

This simple example puts us in a position to see why command-andcontrol regulation is so inefficient. The historical approach to pollution regulation was to require each and every polluter to reduce its historical pollution level in a base year by the same proportional amount. In the example just considered, if regulators wanted to reduce total SO2 emissions by half, they'd have required both Limpio and Sucio to switch from their dirtiest process to their intermediate one. That would have achieved the desired total reduction, but the increase in total operating cost would have been $1,030 per day: $1,000 for Sucio and $30 for Limpio. That’s $940 more than the $90 it would have cost to achieve the same result by having Limpio switch from its dirtiest process to its cleanest one.

Requiring equal proportional reductions from all polluters is wasteful because it takes no account of the fact that some polluters can reduce pollution far more cheaply than others. Regulators could have achieved the efficient result by simply instructing Limpio to switch to its cleanest process. In general, however, regulators lack detailed knowledge about the kinds of different abatement technologies that are available to individual firms. It’s unrealistic to expect them to be able to micromanage the process at that level.

Why the Tax Approach Minimizes Total Cleanup Costs

Regulators can, however, ensure that any given pollution target is achieved in the cheapest possible manner. In the example just discussed, suppose regulators levied a tax of $40 on each ton of SO2 emitted. Limpio would respond by switching from its dirtiest to its cleanest production process, since doing so would save $240 a day in tax payments but would cost only $90 a day. Sucio, for its part, would continue using its dirtiest production process, since the tax savings it could achieve by switching to cleaner processes would be too small to cover the corresponding cost increases.

Limpio would thus assume the entire burden of the pollution reduction effort, which would be efficient because its abatement costs are so much lower than Sucio’s. But because Limpio would be emitting no SO2 it would also pay no emissions taxes. The tax approach to pollution abatement is thus not only efficient but also equitable.

Compared to the alternative of taking no action to curb emissions, the tax approach increases the economic well-being of society as a whole. The only cost incurred because of the tax was the extra $90 a day Limpio spent in switching to its cleanest production process. And since the total benefit of the tax was the $240 daily reduction in emissions damages, the net benefit to society as a whole was $150 a day. The daily tax payment of $240 made by Sucio was a cost of the policy from Sucio’s perspective, but not from the perspective of society as a whole, because the extra revenue meant that other taxes could be reduced by precisely the same amount.

The key to understanding the efficacy of the tax approach is to recognize that the damage done by SO2 emissions depends on their total concentration in the atmosphere, not on who put them there. Society’s interest thus lies in holding down the total cost of any given pollution reduction, not in achieving specific reductions by specific parties. The tax approach minimizes that cost by giving the parties with the lowest abatement costs an incentive to assume most of the cleanup effort.

The optimistic portrait that emerges from this hypothetical example was affirmed in practice when Congress adopted SO2 permits as part of its amendments to the Clean Air Act in 1990. SO2 is an important precursor of acid rain, a problem that had grown increasingly costly in the Northeast in the 1970s and 1980s. The new legislation required that firms obtain a permit for each ton of SO2 they emit into the atmosphere. Total SO2 emissions were brought down by gradual reductions in the number of permits issued. Since firms were permitted to buy and sell permits at an auction organized by the Chicago Board of Trade, the permit requirement was functionally equivalent to a tax on SO). Emitting an extra ton of SO2 required the permit holder to forgo the revenue it could have received by selling the permit, so the opportunity cost of using a permit is essentially an implicit tax on SO).

The program was spectacularly successful, achieving emissions targets well ahead of schedule and at a cost well below what would have been required under command-and-control regulation.’ Articles about the acid rain problem, which used to appear regularly in the news media, have all but completely disappeared.

Objections to the Tax Approach

Economists had been actively proposing the permit/tax approach to pollution abatement since the dawn of the environmental movement, but environmental groups and other critics on the left were initially hostile to those proposals. One environmentalist, for example, was reported to have asked, “What's next, the L.A. Police Department trying to buy civil rights credits from Wisconsin?” Criticisms like “Economists want to let rich firms pollute to their heart’s content!” were common.

The latter criticism betrays a comically naive view of firm behavior. Firms don't pollute because they derive pleasure from doing so. They do it because removing pollution costs money. Although it took decades for the economists’ proposals to be enacted into law, environmental groups are now among the most enthusiastic supporters of the tax approach. Groups like the Sierra Club, for example, have urged their supporters to purchase SO2 permits and tear them up, thus helping to bring emissions even lower than regulatory targets.

What reasons might libertarians or other free-market conservatives offer for opposing a tax on SO2? For the moment, let's assume agreement that the framework outlined by the economist Ronald Coase is the right way to think about this question (see chapter 6). Some libertarians may disagree, but as I'll explain in the next chapter, that’s a very difficult position for them to defend. Many free-market enthusiasts embraced the Coase framework in the belief that it would help minimize government's regulatory footprint. This belief was grounded on Coase’ demonstration that if negotiation among parties affected by harmful activities were practical, they'd have strong incentives to arrive at efficient solutions on their own.

Well and good. But as Coase understood clearly, transaction costs often make it impractical for people to negotiate with one another. And in such cases, efficient solutions may require government intervention. When negotiation is impractical, Coase argued, government should adopt institutional arrangements that guide affected parties to the solutions they'd have negotiated on their own if negotiation had been practical.

With hundreds of different SO2 sources and millions of different people adversely affected by SO), privately negotiated solutions are simply not a practical option. Coase’s framework thus suggests that law should place the burden of ameliorating pollution damage on whoever can accomplish it at lowest cost.

Consumers have almost no attractive options for solving this kind of problem. Emitters, in contrast, have a variety of options, such as installing scrubbers in their smokestacks or burning low-sulfur coal. Coase’s framework thus suggests that the best remedy for acid rain was to define property rights in such a way that producers would have an incentive to reduce SO2 emissions. ‘Taxing SO2 emissions—or equivalently, requiring permits for them —is the most efficient way to solve this problem. It’s also the least intrusive.

Such a tax is not theft. It makes goods whose production is accompanied by SO2 emissions more expensive, yes, but the increase in price is simply a reflection of the costs that those emissions impose on others. The price of any product that generates harmful side effects should reflect their cost, just as it should reflect the cost of the labor and materials used to produce it. Because the tax reduced damage from SO2 emissions by more than the corresponding increase in production costs, it made the overall value of economic output larger, not smaller. Citizens as a whole were not victims of this tax; they were beneficiaries of it.

Legislators who favor an SO2 tax do not reveal by that fact that they think the bureaucrats in Washington know how to spend your money more wisely than you do. On the contrary, they understand that when valuable resources, such as the air we breathe, are free, people tend to use them inefficiently. This tax actually makes it possible for you to purchase more of the things you value.

If libertarian antitax rhetoric had blocked implementation of this tax, it would have been like Ralph Nader's Aviation Consumer Action Project having succeeded in its effort to block airlines from offering compensation to volunteers who relinquished their seats on overbooked flights. As discussed in chapter 7, using the price system to allocate scarce resources makes the economic pie larger, whether the resources in question are seats on an overbooked flight or air currents with limited capacity to disperse SQ).

Libertarians would also have no grounds for objection if transfer payments had been necessary to secure legislative approval of a tax on SO). Using the price system to allocate scarce resources makes the economic pie larger, but that does not guarantee that everyone will automatically get a larger slice than before. For example, perhaps most of the customers served by Sucio have low incomes, making it difficult for them to bear the higher prices made necessary by that company’s SO2 taxes. Their political opposition to the tax might be eased by including provisions to strengthen the social safety net. The important point is that when a policy change makes the economic pie larger, it’s always possible for those who benefit from that change to fully compensate those who are harmed by it. As discussed in chapter 7, failure to carry out such compensation has blocked many efficient policy changes, to the detriment of rich and poor alike.

Climate Change and CO, Taxes

Essentially the same case can be made for taxing CO, growing atmospheric concentrations of which are believed to be a principal contributor to global warming. Critics of proposals to tax CO, emphasize that forecasts involving climate change are highly uncertain, a fact they view as arguing against taking action. But uncertainty is a two-edged sword. Climate researchers themselves readily concede that estimates based on their models are extremely uncertain. But that means that although the actual outcome might be much better than their median forecast, it might also be significantly worse.

Organizers of the 2009 climate conference in Copenhagen sought to limit global warming to 3.6°F by the end of the century. But even an increase that small will cause deadly harm, and the most respected climate change models estimate that there is essentially no chance that average temperature will rise by less than that amount if we take no action.

According to recent estimates from the Integrated Global Systems Model at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the median forecast is for a climb of 9°F by century’s end, in the absence of effective countermeasures.* The same model estimates a 10 percent chance of temperature rising by more than 12°F. If that happened, the permafrost would melt, freeing vast quantities of methane into the atmosphere. Methane is fifty times more potent a greenhouse gas than CO;. Thus, according to the MIT model, we face a roughly one in ten chance of global warming sufficient to extinguish much of life on earth.

Again, forecasts from climate models are highly uncertain. Things might not be as bad as predicted. But they could also be much worse. Should we take action? To respond to that question, we must ask, how much it would cost? The answer, as it turns out, is astonishingly little.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimated that a tax of $80/ton on carbon emissions would be needed by 2030 to achieve climate stability by 2100.° A tax that high would raise the price of gasoline by $0.70 a gallon. This figure was determined, however, before the arrival of the more pessimistic MIT estimates. So let's assume a tax of $300 a ton, just to be safe. Under such a tax, the prices of goods would rise in proportion to their carbon footprints—in the case of gasoline, for example, by roughly $2.60 a gallon.

As we saw in 2008, a sudden price increase of that magnitude could indeed be painful. But if phased in gradually, it would cause much less harm. Facing steadily increasing fuel prices, for example, manufacturers would scramble to develop more efficient vehicles. Many Europeans now pay $4a gallon more for gas than Americans do. But precisely because of that fact, European automakers have pioneered development of many of the world’s most fuel-efficient cars. Europeans actually spend less on gas than Americans do, yet they seem no less happy with their rides.

If a family traded in its aging Ford Bronco (15 mpg) for a Ford Focus wagon (32 mpg), it would spend less on gas than before, even if it drove just as much. The tax could be phased in slowly, to give people time to adjust. People would also move closer to work, form car pools, choose less distant vacation destinations, and so on. Some of the revenue from the tax could be used to send checks to low-income families to ease the burden of higher gas prices. Portions of it could help pay down debt and rebuild crumbling infrastructure, or reduce other taxes.

In 2009 the House of Representatives actually passed an energy bill that included a comprehensive carbon cap-and-trade system, the functional equivalent of a carbon tax. Although many Republican legislators had long advocated cap-and-trade legislation as a framework for mitigating environmental externalities, the movement libertarian/Tea Party wing of the Republican Party has come out foursquare against such policies, denouncing them as social engineering.

Of course they’re social engineering! The reason for this tax is that because were currently allowed to discharge CO, into the atmosphere for free, we spew out far too much of it, threatening gross harm to everyone. Yet today its difficult to find even a single Republican candidate for national office who publicly supports cap and trade. And Republicans now have more than enough votes in the Senate to prevent energy legislation from even coming to a vote in that chamber.

The logic they offer in support of their position would be comical if the stakes weren't so high. James Inhofe, a Republican senator from Oklahoma, has said that “the claim that global warming is caused by man-made emissions is simply untrue and not based on sound science.”* It’s a preposterous misstatement. Only a tiny minority of scientists working in the climate arena would even pretend to agree with it, and virtually all of them have been heavily funded by the energy industry. The vast majority of climate scientists believe that unchecked greenhouse gas emissions will continue to cause average surface temperatures to rise substantially. The only uncertainty is about how much. The risk of catastrophic climate change could be eliminated by a simple change in tax policy. Yet the antitax zealots are poised to prevent that from happening. Movement libertarians are a small minority, but their slogans have wreaked havoc far out of proportion to their number.

Congestion Fees

Exactly analogous logic applies to taxes on other activities that cause harm to others. When you enter a congested roadway, for example, you cause harm to others by making them take longer to get where they're going. Libertarians and other free-market conservatives have no grounds for objecting to congestion taxes like the daily fee of $14 that was imposed on cars entering central London on weekdays beginning in February 2003. As a direct consequence of that fee, traffic fell by a third and travel times on some bus lines fell by half. CO, emissions fell by 20 percent, and there were substantial declines as well in emissions of particulates and nitrogen oxides, the main components of urban smog.’

As in the example of the SO2 tax discussed earlier, people for whom being unable to drive in central London would have been most costly responded by paying the fee and continuing to drive. Others rescheduled their trips during off-peak times or took public transportation. The aggregate value of reduced congestion and pollution was far larger than the cost of the accommodations people made. And revenue from the fee meant that the government would need to collect less revenue from other taxes. We must tax something, and it’s far better to tax harmful activities than useful ones.

In 2007, New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg proposed a similar congestion fee for motorists who enter Manhattan south of 86th Street on weekdays. Cars would face a daily charge of $8 between 6 Am and 6 pM, and the proposed fee for commercial trucks was $21. Although the mayor's proposal would have produced net benefits comparable to those of the London plan, critics immediately denounced it as unfair to the poor. New York City councilman Lewis A. Fidler, for example, said “It creates a city of haves and have-nots,” adding that the bill says “those who can afford it may come and those who cannot afford it may not.”® Although the mayor's proposal won tentative approval from the New York City Council, such objections persuaded legislators in Albany to block it. Yet critics’ concerns could have been addressed easily. In light of high bridge tolls and parking fees, very few poor people were commuting by car into Manhattan in the first place. Most were already taking public transportation. Occasionally, however, a low-income worker must drive into the city in order to take a child or parent to the doctor or run some other errand. Had Mayor Bloomberg been less concerned about political pushback from the right, he might have been willing to consider amending his proposal to include ten free vouchers every year for every low-income motorist who works in the city. Most of those vouchers probably would have ended up being sold to others on Craigslist, and the offer would have gone a long way toward eliminating opposition to the proposal.

But any such amendment would have provoked howls of protest from movement libertarians and other free-market conservatives. “Government has no right to tax me and give my money to the poor!” Such slogans have been astonishingly effective. All too often, however, they have served only to block policies that would make life better for everyone.

Taxing Vehicles by Weight

Mill’s harm principle also suggests the legitimacy of taxing vehicles by weight. For many years, American motorists purchased sports utility vehicles in steadily growing numbers, many in the belief that these vehicles were safer than sedans. The truth, however, is more complex. Other things equal, when two vehicles collide head on, occupants of the heavier vehicle are more likely to survive. In a head-on collision between a 7,200-pound Ford Excursion and a 2,500-pound Honda Civic, for example, you definitely want to be in the Ford. Yet because of their weight and high center of gravity, large SUVs typically handle poorly, which makes them less likely to avoid collisions in the first place, and more likely to roll over during evasive maneuvers. Overall, the occupant of a typical SUV is less safe than the occupant of a typical sedan.’

But in terms of which type of vehicle poses a bigger risk to others, it's no contest: the SUV is the hands-down winner. The heavier a vehicle is, the more likely it is to cause deaths and serious injuries to the occupants of other vehicles.

As in the SO2 example, there is no prospect that people might negotiate private solutions to this particular externality. If the government's challenge is to define property rights to mimic as closely as possible the outcomes that people would have agreed to on their own if negotiation had been practical, the simplest solution would be a tax on vehicle weight. Such a tax would induce motorists to consider the risks they impose on others when choosing which vehicle to buy. Under current arrangements, they have no incentive to take those risks into account at all. Another advantage of having such a tax would be that current tax rates on beneficial activities could be lower. On what grounds could anyone insist that taxing vehicles by weight would deprive motorists of a right they ought to enjoy?

Tobacco Taxes

Taxes on tobacco also reduce harm and are attractive for similar reasons. Smoking is indisputably harmful to those who smoke, and there’s persuasive evidence that second-hand smoke causes significant harm to others. Most smokers, in fact, say they wish they had never started. The most reliable predictor of whether someone will take up the habit is the proportion of her friends who smoke. Cigarette company lobbyists cite evidence of that fact in support of their claim that higher tobacco taxes won't reduce smoking rates.

A heavily addicted adult smoker would indeed be unlikely to stop smoking only because of a steep tax on cigarettes. But most people who smoke took up the habit when they were teenagers. And because most teenagers have limited disposable incomes, cigarette taxes have much more impact on their decisions.

More important, peer effects cut both ways. If taxes discourage a teenager from smoking, that teen’s peer group will have a smaller proportion of smokers in it. And that, in turn, will discourage still others from smoking, and so on. Studies have actually found that smokers themselves are happier in states with higher tobacco taxes.'° Most smokers would like to quit their habit, and they seem to understand that their goal will be much easier to achieve in an environment with fewer smokers and higher-priced cigarettes. Higher taxes help create such environments.

Being a smoker causes harm to others, not just by exposing them to second-hand smoke but also by making others more likely to become smokers themselves. A world without cigarette taxes would be a world with many more smokers. If your children grew up in such a world, they'd be much more likely to become smokers. they'd be more likely to get lung cancer. they'd be more likely to suffer from emphysema, more likely to suffer from heart disease. They'd be more likely to die in a house fire. Why would parents want their children to grow up in a world like that, rather than in one in which cigarette taxes not only make such outcomes less likely but also permit lower taxes on useful activities?

Alcohol Taxes

The arguments regarding taxation of alcohol are somewhat more complex. Unlike most smokers, most people who consume alcoholic beverages do so with no apparent signs of regret. Most drinkers are also not significantly more likely to cause harm to others than people who don't drink at all. In the United States, harmful effects from alcohol consumption are caused almost entirely by the 5 percent of drinkers who consume more than 40 percent of all alcohol consumed." Many members of this group harm others in multiple ways. They neglect and abuse family members; they injure and kill others in automobile accidents; they physically assault others; and so on.

Opponents of higher alcohol taxes often complain that the behavior of long-term heavy drinkers would not be much affected by such taxes. But available evidence suggests otherwise. It’s true that many drinkers continue to consume alcohol to excess long past the point at which it has begun to take a heavy toll on their careers and marriages. Such people wouldn't want to cut back their alcohol intake just because the after-tax price of drinking went up. But as economists have long emphasized, choice is about scarcity. People often ignore increases in the prices of goods that account for only a small share of their total expenditures. If the price of salt were to double, for example, most people would consume the same amount of it as before. But long-term heavy drinkers spend a substantial share of their incomes on drink—in part simply because they drink so much, but also in part because their heavy drinking causes them to earn less. They simply cannot afford to ignore steep increases in the price of alcohol.

The challenge confronting any attempt to examine how alcohol taxes affect problem drinkers is that sales data tell us nothing about who bought and consumed the alcohol. The economist Philip Cook came up with an ingenious way to circumvent this problem.” His strategy was based on the observations that long-term heavy drinkers are responsible for a large proportion of all alcohol-related traffic accidents and also account for an overwhelming proportion of all deaths from cirrhosis of the liver. His core finding: in the wake of a significant increase in a state’s alcohol taxes, there were striking reductions in the number of both alcohol-related traffic accidents and deaths from cirrhosis of the liver, but there were no such changes in neighboring states that did not raise alcohol taxes. Although most heavy drinkers with liver disease know that the surest path to recovery is by reducing their alcohol intake, that knowledge alone is seldom enough to change their behavior. Yet many respond quickly to a change in price incentives.

Another objection to alcohol taxation is that it’s unfair to punish the majority who drink responsibly to curb the behavior of a small minority who drink irresponsibly. But the fact that heavy drinkers consume the lion’s share of all alcohol purchased means that any tax on alcohol would fall disproportionately on them. The resulting revenue would make it possible for income tax rates to be lower by more than enough to offset alcohol taxes paid by moderate and light drinkers.

Taxing Activities That Cause Indirect Harm

The harmful activities I've discussed so far in this chapter have all been ones in which one person's action harms others in ways they have no practical ways to avoid on their own. You can take all reasonable care as a driver, for example, yet still be at risk of being hit by an SUV that runs a stop sign. The examples so far have also been ones in which the activity in question causes direct, physical harm to others. Regulating such activities is thus legitimate even under a fairly restrictive reading of Mill’s harm principle, as discussed in chapter 1.

The harms caused by many of the consumption activities discussed in chapter 5 are also ones that victims would have great difficulty avoiding on their own. But those activities typically do not cause physical harm directly. Compared to tax remedies for activities that cause direct physical harm, many libertarians may feel uncomfortable embracing tax remedies for problems caused by shifting social frames of reference. But in the next chapter I will press the case that the distinction between physical and nonphysical harm should not be decisive. The real issue is how costly it is to avoid the adverse consequences of others’ behavior. When others borrow more heavily to increase their bids for houses in good school districts, for example, you have no good options. You can either borrow more yourself, and suffer the attendant financial risk, or else refrain from borrowing and be forced to send your children to lower-quality schools.

Bicycle and Motorcycle Helmet Rules

A more challenging hybrid case is the example of bicycle and motorcycle helmet rules. When one of my sons was 14, he took a serious spill on his bike, landing violently on his head and shoulder. Fortunately, he suffered only a mild concussion and a broken collarbone. But the emergency room doctor who treated him told me he probably would have been killed had he not been wearing his helmet, the right side of which was completely shattered when he struck the ground.

The main reason he was wearing a helmet was that New York State has a law requiring them for all bicyclists under the age of 16. Some parents object to this law, saying that it should be their responsibility, not the state's, to prescribe safety standards for their children.

But even before my son’s accident, I and many other parents I know were grateful for the requirement. Many boys display their willingness to incur risks as a badge of honor, and those who wear helmets in the absence of a requirement are often derided by their peers. In an ideal world, parents would successfully condition their children to ignore such pressures. But we don't live in an ideal world. What is clear, in any event, is that if helmets were not required, substantially fewer children would wear them, notwithstanding the best efforts of their parents.

Does New York State’s helmet requirement meet John Stuart Mill’s test? That is, does it restrict someone's behavior in order to prevent undue harm to others? That the requirement prevents enormous harm is beyond dispute. Except for it, many more children, perhaps including my son, would be dead today. Quite apart from the loss of their own lives is the loss suffered by parents and others who care about these children. Even without precise estimates of the magnitude of those losses, surely no one can doubt their immensity. The question then is whether the considerable harm prevented by the helmet requirement outweighs the harm experienced by those who are forced to wear them.

Of course, many people who are subject to the requirement would have worn a helmet anyway. Even so, many of them are quietly grateful for the requirement, because they find it socially less awkward to wear one when almost everyone else does. For the same reason, many others who would not have worn helmets without a requirement are pleased about being required to do so. For these groups, the requirement causes no harm at all, just as a helmet rule causes no harm to most hockey players. But inevitably there will also be a minority who are offended by the mandate, and the harm suffered by this group must be weighed against the harm prevented.

As discussed in chapter 7, strict application of Mill’s harm principle would require defensible estimates of the dollar equivalent magnitudes of the harms on both sides of the equation. The New York State legislature passed its helmet law in the absence of such estimates, perhaps because most lawmakers thought that the obvious harm it would prevent vastly outweighed any possible harm it might cause.

Libertarians who oppose the helmet rule should be prepared to argue that the annoyance of those who would be offended by it constitutes greater harm than the pain and suffering that the requirement prevents. Few libertarians, however, seem prepared to argue in these terms. Instead, they appear content merely to assert that helmet rules should not be permitted, because the state doesn't have the right to tell people how to conduct their lives. But unless they're willing to abandon Mill's principle completely, that simply wont do. If libertarians have the power to block the majority's desire to implement a helmet rule for children, they have the power to inflict enormous harm on parents and others. By what right might they claim such an entitlement?

Some libertarians will object that the example is unfair, that of course the state should have the right to enact helmet requirements for children, who, after all, often lack the necessary judgment and experience to make prudent decisions about risky behavior. It’s a reasonable objection. But evidence suggests that nothing magical happens when a child morphs into an adult. Myopia, naive optimism, and vulnerability to social pressure may diminish with chronological age, but these traits are still present in ample measure in most adults. And like children, the typical adult has many others who love him, people who will suffer greatly if he is seriously injured or killed.

During a sabbatical year in Paris, I had a conversation with a colleague who biked to the office daily through forty-five minutes of heavy traffic. Although bicycle accidents are common in Paris, this intelligent, emotionally mature woman never wore a helmet. I told her about my son’s accident and urged her to consider wearing one. When she demurred, I teasingly suggested that her reluctance was rooted in her fear of looking unfashionable. She protested vigorously, and I believe truthfully, that she had little interest in fashion. A few weeks later, however, she sheepishly admitted that shed tried on some helmets over the weekend and just couldn't imagine herself appearing in public with one. Little wonder. I can’t recall seeing even one female cyclist wearing a helmet during the entire year I spent in Paris. To be the only one would indeed be socially awkward.

Nor can I imagine the French passing a law requiring helmets (although neither could I have imagined their recent passage of a law banning smoking in bars and restaurants). But libertarians who accept Mill’s harm principle cannot categorically oppose such laws, even when they apply to adults. Because the social environment profoundly affects individual decisions, many individuals find it extremely costly to escape the effect of what others do. Some people will be harmed whether we require helmets or not. In such cases, our shared interest is in minimizing total harm.

Over the violent objections of libertarians, many states have passed laws requiring even adult motorcyclists to wear helmets. My son who suffered the bicycle injury is an adult now. He is not a motorcyclist, but if he were I would be grateful that New York is among the states with a helmet requirement. But too often missing from public debates about such requirements are forceful advocates for alternative strategies that would be less costly to the people who are most deeply offended by outright prohibitions.

The decision by even mature adults about whether to wear helmets is often sensitive to the proportion of other people who wear them. In environments in which helmet wearing is rare—an environment, for example, like the one confronting my former colleague in Paris—someone who wears one can stand out like a sore thumb. And it’s a plain fact that stable environments exist in which few wear helmets, even though most might prefer that they and others wear thera. We also know that not wearing helmets can cause grievous harm, not only to the persons injured but also to those who care about them. Requiring helmets might thus bring about a reduction in total harm that would dwarf the harm caused by the requirement to those who don't want to wear helmets under any circumstances.

Yet the libertarian objection to such a requirement has obvious force. Anyone who wants to wear a helmet is free to do so. Without denying that the prospect of being embarrassed by standing out from the crowd could discourage someone from wearing one, the impulse is to say that’s her problem. Perhaps she should think harder about what's really important and do her best to get over her concern about what others might think. If the alternative were to force others to wear helmets who don't want to, it would be those people whod be left with no recourse. Still, there is something troubling about a situation in which most people aren't wearing helmets, and know they won't unless others do, and yet wish most people including themselves were wearing one.

Fortunately, however, an absolute helmet requirement is not the only way to deal with this problem. We could adopt a flexible helmet requirement from which anyone could purchase an exemption for a modest fee. By paying, say, $300 a year, someone could buy a decal from the Department of Motor Vehicles that could be affixed to the bike's license plate, serving notice to police that the rider of that particular bike was exempt from the helmet requirement.

The logic of this approach runs exactly parallel to the logic that made taxing SO2 attractive. Just as removing SO2 is more costly for some firms than others, having to wear a helmet is more costly for some people than others. Just as the damage from SO2 depends on the total amount of it discharged into the air, the social pressure that dissuades people from wearing helmets depends on the proportion of riders who ride without one. And in each case, the efficient solution will be one that induces those who can adjust most easily to take the necessary remedial actions. Just as a tax on SO2 induces firms whose abatement costs are low to adopt cleaner technologies, a tax on riding without a helmet would most encourage helmet wearing by those who object least strongly to them.

If libertarians still aren't comfortable with this tax, they might consider that it not only reduces harm but also raises revenue that could be used to pay for useful public services. It would thus enable tax rates on useful activities to be lower. A tax on riding without a helmet would mean we could reduce the payroll tax, which discourages job creation, or reduce the tax on income, which discourages savings.

A Slippery Slope?

I conclude with an example involving perhaps the most controversial tax proposals of recent years. These would be proposals to tax sugared soft drinks, which have been identified as an important causal factor in the obesity epidemic. Over the vociferous objections of libertarians and others, such a tax was recently enacted by the city of Washington, D.C. The Senate Finance Committee considered and rejected a similar tax during its search for ways to pay for the Obama administration’s health care reform legislation. And former New York Governor David Paterson unsuccessfully proposed such a tax as he desperately sought additional revenue to bridge the state’s huge budget deficit.

Critics of soda taxes regard them as the ultimate intrusion by the nanny state. The case for them is indeed different from the case for taxes on behavior that causes harm to others. People who become obese from drinking too many sodas fortified with high-fructose corn syrup are also more likely to suffer from diabetes and heart disease. They're more likely to have their feet amputated. They’re more likely to die prematurely. But these are primarily costs that the soda drinker imposes on his future self, not others. To be sure, medical complications from excessive corn syrup consumption often require treatment at public expense. But much of this expense is in lieu of similar end-of-life medical expenses that would be incurred if the soda drinkers had lived a normal lifespan. And as many economists have pointed out, premature deaths actually spare the government billions of dollars in Social Security payments.

In short, taxing sugared drinks is closer to a pure form of paternalism than taxing behaviors that pose direct threats to others. Yet there can be little doubt that soda taxes would change behavior in ways that would please many taxpayers themselves. As discussed in chapter 2, for example, evidence suggests a persistent human tendency to place too much emphasis on immediate costs and benefits, and too little on those that occur with uncertainty or delay. Most people who consume sugared soft drinks do so because they taste good, not because they want their future selves to be obese. Years later, if a tax had led them to reduce their consumption of these beverages, few would look back on that fact with regret.

From a behavioral perspective, the future self is in many respects a more separate person from the current self than a perfect stranger is. Suppose, for example, that the immediate consequence of drinking sugared sodas were to require amputation of a perfect stranger's foot because of diabetes-impaired circulation. If that causal connection were clear, almost no one would drink too many sugared sodas. But concern to avoid harm restrains behavior much less forcefully when the victim is the distant future self and the damage is uncertain.

Arguing against soda taxes, the economist Greg Mankiw worries that to approve them would be to embark on a slippery slope. Thus, he wrote, “Taxing soda may encourage better nutrition and benefit our future selves. But so could taxing candy, ice cream and fried foods. Subsidizing broccoli, gym memberships and dental floss comes next. Taxing mindless television shows and subsidizing serious literature cannot be far behind.”” It’s a legitimate concern. But we're forced to go part way down slippery slopes all the time. It's a concern we can set to one side until we have traveled further down this particular slope. Consuming large quantities of soda laced with high-fructose corn syrup clearly causes substantial harm. And as long as were continuing to tax saving, job creation, and other beneficial activities, the case for replacing such taxes with taxes on harmful activities is compelling.
