Chapter 6. Perpetrators and Victims.

In almost every country IN EUROPE, individual behavior is more heavily regulated than in the United States. And in the United States, behavior is more heavily regulated now than it was a century ago. Both comparisons are rooted in differences in population density. There have always been many more people per square mile in Europe than in the United States, where population density is much higher now than it was in frontier days. With higher density, people collide with one another more often.

Society is not only more densely populated now, but also much more highly interactive, in part because of higher density. These trends will continue, and with them will come additional demands for regulation. The societies that respond more intelligently to those demands will be more likely to prosper.

But until we understand the market failures that prompt demands for regulation, we're unlikely to adopt the best remedies. Liberals have always seen market failure as rooted in natural or artificial barriers to perfect competition. But greater population density does not cause monopoly in product markets. Nor does it undermine competition in labor markets. Nor, finally, does it render consumers less rational or well informed. The positive link between regulation and population density thus provides no support for the traditional liberal view.

That same link, however, is squarely consistent with Darwin's insight that individual and group interests often diverge sharply. When they do, opportunities for causing harm to others clearly increase with population density.

Darwin himself wasn’t much concerned with how to narrow the wedge between individual and group interests. Most animal species, after all, have only extremely limited capacity to act collectively. Humans are of course a conspicuous exception. Even the earliest hunter-gatherer groups employed social norms extensively to constrain the self-interested behavior of their members.’ Yet we remain in the dark ages in terms of our understanding of how best to limit behavior that causes harm to others.

It may be only a slight exaggeration to say that every human act that harms someone else provokes a corresponding demand for additional regulation. But preventing all activities that harm others is obviously not an option. John Stuart Mill’s harm principle must be understood as saying that the only legitimate reason for government to limit someone's freedom is to prevent undue harm to others. We permit harmful behavior all the time. Unkind remarks, for example, cause harm to others, yet we permit them within limits because the harm from curtailing free speech would be even greater. Similarly, a firm is permitted to cut its price and thereby harm its rivals, perhaps even drive them out of business, because failure to allow this would cause even greater harm to consumers. For the harm principle to make any sense at all, it must be understood to mean that the legitimacy of a restriction must be decided by weighing its cost to those being restricted against the harm others would suffer if the behavior weren't restricted.

The Pivotal Contribution of Ronald Coase

Ronald Coase (rhymes with “rose”) won the Nobel Prize in economics in 1991 largely on the strength of his contribution to our way of thinking about this delicate balancing act. An economist born and educated in England, Coase spent the latter part of his career on the faculty of the University of Chicago Law School, where he was revered by that university's free-market enthusiasts as the world’s foremost authority on behavior that causes harm to others.

Movement libertarians are reluctant to acknowledge that such behavior is ever a proper concern of regulators. But more serious libertarians, who are well represented among the University of Chicago's distinguished faculty, have always recognized the need to grapple with the implications of harmful behavior.” They saw Coase as their champion because they believed his framework provided the most cogent arguments for limiting the reach of regulators. In one sense they were right. But in another sense, they were profoundly mistaken.

On the first point, Coase showed that, under certain restrictive conditions, private parties could resolve many problems on their own that were once thought to require detailed intervention by regulators.’ But although Coase deeply appreciated the ingenuity and elegance of many market solutions, he was no ideologue. Many of his disciples simply ignored his clear acknowledgment that practical obstacles often prevent private parties from negotiating efficient contracts. In such cases, he recognized, government intervention could often improve matters.

His core insight first appeared in the context of a brief example in a 1959 paper entitled “The Federal Communications Commission.”* Then as now, broadcast rights worth millions of dollars were awarded free of charge to private entrepreneurs by regulators at the Federal Communications Commission. Coase argued that much better use would be made of those rights if they were instead sold to the highest bidders, who would put them to the highest-valued uses.

One of the issues that had prompted broadcast regulation in the first place was that the exercise of broadcast rights often caused harm to others. Signals broadcast on one frequency often interfered with those broadcast on closely adjacent frequencies. Coase’s insight was that if negotiations between broadcasters were practical, they could resolve such problems satisfactorily on their own.

His now-famous example likened the problem of broadcast interference to one adjudicated in a lawsuit filed by a doctor whose practice was disturbed by noise from an adjacent factory. The facts of the case as Coase summarized them were as follows:

A confectioner had used certain premises for his business for a great many years. When a doctor came and occupied a neighboring property, the working of the confectioner’s machinery caused the doctor no harm until, some eight years later, he built a consulting room at the end of his garden, right against the confectioner’s premises. Then it was found that noise and vibrations caused by the machinery disturbed the doctor in his work. The doctor then brought an action and succeeded in securing an injunction preventing the confectioner from using his machinery. What the courts had, in fact, to decide was whether the doctor had the right to impose additional costs on the confectioner through compelling him to install new machinery, or move to a new location, or whether the confectioner had the right to impose additional costs on the doctor through compelling him to do his consulting somewhere else on his premises or at another location.’

Before Coase, it was common for policy discussions of activities that cause harm to others to be couched in terms of perpetrators and victims. A factory that created noise was a perpetrator, and an adjacent physician whose practice suffered as a result was a victim. Coase’s insight was that externalities like noise or smoke are purely reciprocal phenomena. The factory's noise harms the doctor, yes; but to invoke the doctor's injury as grounds for prohibiting the noise would harm the factory owner.

It was surely not the factory owner's intent to harm the doctor. Nor was it the doctor’s intent to impede the workings of the factory. Their proximity to one another and the nature of their specific activities created a mutual problem to be solved. Both the factory owner and the doctor, Coase argued, have a shared interest in finding the least costly solution to it. He concluded that unless it were impractical for them to negotiate with one another, they'd always be able to resolve it efficiently, regardless of whether the government held the factory owner liable for noise damages.

Suppose, for example, that if the doctor did nothing, the noise would cause his practice $20,000 in damage, but that he could avoid noise damage altogether by moving to a different location, which would cost him $10,000. Suppose also that the factory owner could eliminate the noise by installing soundproofing on his machinery at a cost of $5,000. Since soundproofing is cheaper, it’s a better way to solve the noise problem than for the doctor to incur the expense of moving. Coase pointed out that if the doctor and factory owner could negotiate with one another at negligible cost, they should be able to reach an agreement calling for the installation of soundproofing, whether or not the government held the factory owner liable for noise damage.

The first part of that claim was obvious. Thus, suppose government made the factory owner liable for noise damage, meaning that if he continued to produce noise, he'd have to pay the doctor $20,000 to compensate for the damage. The owner's best response would then be to install soundproofing, since that would cost him only $5,000 and would eliminate the need to compensate the doctor.

It was the second part of Coase’s claim that caught most readers off guard. He pointed out that if the government did not make the factory owner liable for noise damage, the doctor's best option would then be to offer to pay the factory owner to install soundproofing. His next-best alternative, after all, would be to bear the $10,000 cost of moving to escape the noise.

The doctor's payment to the factory owner would have to be large enough to cover the $5,000 cost of the soundproofing, or else the factory owner would refuse to install it (since he is not liable for noise damage). And the payment demanded by the factory owner could not exceed $10,000, because in that case the doctor could solve the noise problem more cheaply by moving.

In short, Coase argued, both parties would have a strong incentive to implement the efficient solution to the problem, irrespective of whether the law held the factory owner responsible for noise damage. Coase was quite explicit that this conclusion rested on the assumption that it was practical for the affected parties to negotiate with one another. Thus, he wrote, “Once the legal rights of the parties are established, negotiation is possible to modify the arrangements envisaged in the legal ruling, if the likelihood of being able to do so makes it worthwhile to incur the costs involved in negotiation.”® When “The Federal Communications Commission” appeared in 1959, it provoked little discussion. Many of those who did react to it—including, notably, Milton Friedman, George Stigler, and other prominent free-market enthusiasts at the University of Chicago—believed that Coase was simply mistaken. Even in a hypothetical world in which contracts could be negotiated at zero cost, they argued, production decisions would surely be affected by whether the law held people liable for damages they inflicted on others. Coase acknowledged that the wealth levels of the doctor and the factory owner would be affected by liability rules, but he insisted that their decision about how to solve the problem would not be.

Never ones to shrink from debate, a group of University of Chicago economists invited Coase, who was then teaching at the University of Virginia, to Chicago to discuss his ideas with them. Twenty economists and Ronald Coase met for dinner at the home of Aaron Director, who was then editor of the Journal of Law and Economics, in which Coase’s paper had appeared. Years later, Stigler offered this recollection of the evening’s conversation: “Milton Friedman did most of the talking, as usual. He also did much of the thinking, as usual. In the course of two hours of argument the vote went from twenty against and one for Coase to twenty-one for Coase. What an exhilarating event! I lamented afterward that we had not had the clairvoyance to tape it.”’ Coase was persuaded to write a much more detailed exposition of his insight, which was published in the Journal of Law and Economics the following year as “The Problem of Social Cost.”* That paper quickly became and remains the most widely cited economics paper ever published.’ But despite the incredible volume of attention it has received, scholars haven't yet grasped its full significance.

What no one disputes is that the paper quickly provoked a firestorm of criticism. Scholars on the left were upset because they interpreted Coase to be saying that government had no essential role to play in regulating pollution or other activities that cause harm to others (beyond seeing to it that property rights were clearly defined and enforced). Others complained that Coase’s analysis seemed oblivious to the moral framework underlying the earlier perpetrators-and-victims approach to such activities. (Ihe doctor didn’t harm anyone! Why should he have to pay for the soundproofing?) But neither of these objections withstands scrutiny.

Barriers to Negotiation

Consider first the charge that Coase had written government out of the picture. Again, his claim that an efficient solution would be achieved irrespective of whether polluters were held liable for damages was quite explicitly predicated on an assumption that anyone familiar with his earlier work would know he believed to be unrealistic. Coase’s first significant paper, “The Nature of the Firm,” published in 1937, was in fact inspired by his observation that practical difficulties often prevented people from negotiating efficient contracts with one another.” This paper was based on field research he had conducted in 1932, when as an undergraduate he received a fellowship to travel to the United States to observe the operations of large American corporations. The specific question he tackled in the 1937 paper was, why do firms exist in the first place? Why, he wanted to know, weren't all business transactions carried out directly between independent contractors? His answer—which, like many big ideas, seems painfully obvious in hindsight— was that the latter approach would necessitate a host of complex and costly transactions.

If you wanted to buy a car, for example, you'd have to negotiate contracts with numerous miners to extract iron ore from the earth, more contracts with others to process the ore into steel, still more contracts to mold the steel into the desired shapes, and so on. Even if the buyer dealt with the most efficient suppliers in each instance, the number and complexity of the required contracts would make the ultimate price of the car prohibitively high. The whole process could be dramatically streamlined, he argued, by forming organizations in which employees simply did the bidding of supervisors.

In the wake of the 1937 paper’s publication, a new field in economics emerged and prospered. Called transaction cost economics, it tries to explain organizational forms and behavior as implicit or explicit consequences of attempts to economize on transaction costs."

In the light of his intellectual history, there is no question that Coase was well aware of practical impediments that often make it prohibitively costly for private parties to negotiate agreements. His intended message simply cannot have been that government has no useful role to play in the regulation of activities that cause harm to others. On the contrary, the deeper message of his 1960 paper was that when negotiation is impractical—as it typically will be—the assignment of liability will often change how problems get solved. In Coase's view, then, the structure of legal responsibility really matters. But it matters in a way that earlier writers had not appreciated. The prevailing view had been that perpetrators should always be held responsible for the damage they cause. Coase challenged that logic at its core. His view was that government should assign the burden of adjusting to externalities to the party for whom that burden would be least costly.

Referring to the earlier example, if the doctor and the factory owner cannot negotiate, the government should hold the factory liable for noise damage if—as under the hypothetical cost values assumed—it would be less costly for the factory to reduce its noise than it would be for the doctor to move to a more sheltered location. But if the reverse were true, then the government should not hold the factory liable. That posture, Coase reasoned, would induce the doctor to relocate, which would be the efficient solution under the circumstances.

Is Cost-Benefit Analysis Immoral?

What about the objection that Coase’s analysis ignored the underlying moral framework governing activities that cause harm to others? What many of Coase’s critics still fail to perceive clearly is that his formulation of the problem reveals a fundamental flaw in the traditional moral framework. That framework, again, viewed the factory owner as the perpetrator and the doctor as the victim. It assumed, without explaining why, that the doctor has a right to conduct his practice undisturbed by noise, and that the government has a duty to enforce that right.

Coase’s analysis raises the question of why the doctor's position should be privileged in this situation. Suppose, for example, that the cost figures assumed earlier were reversed—that is, suppose the doctor could solve the noise problem by moving at a cost of $5,000 and that the factory owner could soundproof his machines at a cost of $10,000. The least costly solution to the problem would then be for the doctor to move. And if negotiation is impractical, Coase’s analysis would recommend not holding the factory owner liable for noise damage, in which case the doctor would have an incentive to solve the problem on his own by moving.

Would it be better to hold the factory owner liable in this case? If we did and if negotiation were practical, wed still get the efficient solution, because the factory owner would have an incentive to pay the doctor to move, thereby to avoid having to incur the $10,000 cost of soundproofing. But such negotiated settlements are typically impractical. So if we make the factory owner liable, his best option would be to spend $10,000 to install soundproofing, because his alternative would be to pay $20,000 to compensate the doctor for noise damage. Yes, the noise problem still gets solved, but at twice the cost of solving it by relocating the doctor.

Although intuition might seem to favor calling the factory owner the perpetrator in this case, Coase’s analysis makes clear that there is no logical basis for that claim. If the doctor had arrived first, he might have acted on the assumption that he could continue to operate his practice undisturbed by noise. And if it could be shown that being able to act on such an assumption helped facilitate productive patterns of investment, that might argue for holding late-arriving noisemakers liable for damage."? But as Coase’s example made clear, the factory owner happened to have been first on the scene in this case.

Alternatively, some might worry that the cost of solving the problem would be too big a burden for the doctor to bear. But someone must bear the cost of solving the problem, no matter what. Nothing in the example suggested that the factory owner was wealthier and hence better able to do so. Perhaps the Latina wheelchair-bound factory owner was barely able to keep her business afloat and employed fifty hard-working, churchgoing, nondrinking, salt-of the-earth employees, each the sole support of a wife and two kids and a dog and a cat. And perhaps the single playboy dermatologist had an incredibly lucrative practice polishing up the complexions of the idle wives of plutocrats and played golf three afternoons a week.

In the absence of any such countervailing considerations, we must consider the possibility that the traditional perpetrators-and-victims moral framework was simply misguided or question-begging. That is, we must consider the possibility that the most sensible way to define rights in situations like these is, as Coase suggested, to mimic as closely as possible the solutions people would have negotiated on their own if negotiations had been practical. Those solutions would always place the burden of adjusting to externalities on the party for whom that burden was least costly. Sometimes that would entail assigning liability to the party whom most would describe as the perpetrator. But not always.

There is a measure of irony in the fact that Ronald Coase quickly emerged as the reigning intellectual hero of free-market conservatives on all matters related to activities that cause harm to others. Their embrace of Coase stems largely from the perception that his framework helped expand the range of problems believed to be soluble without regulatory intervention. That perception is accurate as far as it goes. But again, Coase was never an ideologue. His framework is rooted in strictly pragmatic concerns.

Libertarians often speak of fundamental human rights and freedoms that trump pragmatic concerns. But defending any given right entails both costs and benefits.” Coase’s approach emphasizes that in the end, questions regarding which specific rights to defend are quintessentially practical ones.

Coase might conclude, under certain circumstances, that doctors should have a right to operate free from noise from their neighbors. But if so, it would not be because he thought there was a sacred right to a noise-free environment in all cases. Rather, it would be because he believed that it would be cheaper for people to curb the noise they emit than for affected parties to avoid noise on their own.

Because most moral questions involve actions that cause harm to others, Coase’s framework has something to say about such questions. If his academic appointment had been in a department of moral philosophy, he'd have been classified as a consequentialist—someone who believes the right course of action is the option that produces the best overall consequences."* Their antagonists, the deontologists, concede that consequences matter, but insist that there are also certain bedrock moral principles that must be followed irrespective of consequences.

To the extent that libertarians think it self-evident that people have a right to be free from interference by government regulation—except for laws that prohibit theft, assault, and other egregious forms of direct harm to others—most of them fall squarely in the deontologists’ camp. Yet the Coase framework that so many of them embrace is uncompromisingly consequentialist. It demands an explanation of why such a broad right to be left alone leads to the best consequences overall. And as we'll see, that’s a formidable hurdle.

Deontologists face other hurdles, such as how to explain where the bedrock moral principles they invoke come from. But they often manage to score telling debate points by constructing examples in which the action with the best overall consequences seems clearly impermissible to most observers.

A perennial favorite describes a botanist who wanders into a jungle village where ten innocent people are about to be shot." He is told that nine of them will be spared if he himself will shoot the tenth. What should the botanist do? The consequentialist framework seems to suggest that shooting the innocent man would be the right choice, because doing so would result in a net saving of nine lives, Yet most normal sentient beings are loath to endorse that conclusion. Deontologists insist that such examples demonstrate the bankruptcy of consequentialist moral reasoning.

Consequentialists and deontologists have been at each other’s throats for millennia. Nothing I say here could possibly settle the issues that divide them. But because I will advocate policy claims that follow from Coase’s consequentialist framework, it’s important to emphasize that the two frameworks are less squarely in conflict than may often appear.

An Illustrative Example

A concrete example helps highlight some of the factors that exaggerate the scope of disagreement between the two types of moral reasoning. It’s an example of the type that deontologists often employ to demonstrate the moral bankruptcy of the consequentialist position. Set in Atlanta, Georgia, during the mid-1960s, the question it poses is, “Should interracial couples be prohibited from holding hands in public?” Although most young Americans today find it difficult to believe, there were then laws on the books in some states that prohibited people of different races from marrying. Those laws were declared unconstitutional by a 9-0 vote of the Supreme Court ina landmark 1967 civil rights case.’* But Atlanta in the mid-1960s was still an environment in which interracial couples were a rare sight, and also one in which a substantial proportion of the majority white population would experience significant agitation at the sight of such couples holding hands in public. In that environment, there were few who would benefit from having the right in question and many who would be offended by the exercise of it. The apparent implication is that the option with the best consequences overall would be to prohibit interracial handholding. Because most people would find such a prohibition morally reprehensible, however, deontologists conclude that we must reject the consequentialist framework for thinking about moral questions.

The problem could easily be reframed as a numerical example of the type Coase favored. We might imagine, for instance, that if the city’s 100 interracial couples were each willing to pay $100 a week for the right to hold hands in public, then the combined benefit to them of being able to do so would total $10,000 per week, and that if a million of the city’s whites would be willing to pay $1 a week to avoid the sight of interracial handholding, the weekly cost of granting that right would be $1,000,000. If it were possible for the two groups to negotiate, each of the million whites could chip in, say, $0.10 a week, for a total of $100,000, which would finance a payment of $1,000 a week to each interracial couple that was prevented from holding hands. Compared to the option of no prohibition, each interracial couple would be $900 a week better off than before (the $1,000 payment they receive minus the $100 loss they suffer from not being able to hold hands in public), and each offended white would be $0.90 a week better off (the $1 value each assigns to avoiding the sight of interracial handholding minus the $0.10 each contributes to the compensation payments).

The Coase framework thus seems to say that if it had been practical for the affected parties to negotiate, they'd have agreed to implement the ban on interracial handholding and carried out the indicated compensation payments. Under the circumstances, negotiation would of course be impractical. In such cases, the Coase framework says that the law should place the burden of adjusting to the externality on the party for whom it would be least costly. And since the cumulative monetary damage to interracial couples from not being able to hold hands in public ($10,000) is smaller than the cumulative cost of the sight of handholding to offended whites ($1,000,000), the Coase framework still seems to imply that the right thing to do is to prohibit interracial handholding.

Such examples surely do help explain why consequentialist moral reasoning remains suspect in the eyes of many. But before rejecting the Coase framework, those who share my view that a prohibition on interracial handholding would be wrong should consider the possibility that the framework was simply applied incorrectly in the example.

As described, the analysis completely ignores the fact that people adapt over time in dramatically different ways to different forms of real or imagined injuries. The cumulative amount that white residents of Atlanta in the 1960s would have been willing to pay to avoid the sight of interracial handholding probably did outweigh the cumulative amount that the small number of interracial couples would have been willing to pay for the right to hold hands. But as interracial relationships have become more common during the intervening years, attitudes have changed dramatically, and in ways that were completely predictable at the time.

I was an undergraduate in Atlanta in the 1960s. Many of my college friends were staunchly opposed to interracial relationships of any kind. But my own children, who have never lived in the South, report that they experience no emotional reaction whatsoever to interracial handholding, which has always been a common sight in the environment in which they grew up. As anyone who had experienced life outside the South would have been able to predict, the sense of injury experienced by Southern whites would diminish sharply over time as they adapted to the changing environment.

In contrast, there are many other forms of injury that not only fail to decay over time but actually become more severe. The damage caused by exposure to background noise is a case in point. Not only do people fail to adapt to living in noisy environments, the physiological stress they suffer actually increases with continued exposure.” The time profile of injury experienced by someone prohibited from holding hands with the person of his choosing would almost certainly exhibit a similar pattern. Not only would he fail to adapt to the fact that he was denied a right routinely granted to others, his sense of injury would grow over time.

Activities that cause harm to others are inherently reciprocal. If interracial handholding occurs, some may feel injured. If interracial handholding is prevented, others will surely be injured. The Coase framework says the best response in such cases is the one that minimizes total harm. Proper application of that framework requires an assessment not just of the injuries different parties feel, or claim to feel, in the current moment but also of their ‘capacities to avoid those injuries or adapt to them over time. In short, the Coase framework, properly applied, would never have ruled against interracial handholding in the first place.

Which Rights Should We Defend?

Rights to behave in certain ways don't arise out of thin air. Defending any given right creates benefits for those who value it. But it also generates costs —not just for those tasked with enforcing the right, but also for those whose behavior is restricted by it.

As even deontologists concede, costs and benefits matter in moral decisions. And society’s decision about which rights to enforce clearly has a moral dimension. It isn’t my claim that the Coase framework is the uniquely correct way of thinking about such decisions. But to the extent that we can agree that the costs and benefits of the alternatives we face matter to at least some extent, I hope we can agree that the Coase framework might often facilitate clearer thinking about the relevant trade-offs.

Many libertarians and conservatives have of course long since embraced the Coase framework. As a moment’ reflection makes clear, however, that embrace severely constrains their ability to evade the logical implications of John Stuart Mill’s harm principle. Many libertarians seem inclined to embrace the harm principle when doing so provides them with additional ammunition against a regulation they don't favor. When the principle seems to support a regulation they don't like, however, they're often quick to reject it, insisting that it’s trumped in that instance by some prior right to act in the way they wish to. But the latter tactic forces them to confront the question of where that right comes from.

The Coase framework they embrace says that society should define and enforce rights in such a way as to mimic the agreements people would reach on their own if open negotiation between them were practical. In this framework, a harmful act is one whose consequences someone would be willing to sacrifice real resources to avoid. Harm thus conceived is not confined to physical violence or theft of property. It also includes the various forms of indirect harm discussed in preceding chapters, such as the harm experienced by a sprinter whose rivals consume performance-enhancing drugs.

If libertarians want to stick with their current mix of policy prescriptions, then, they must confront some difficult choices. To continue to reject Mill’s harm principle when it suits them, they must assert that they have the right to take actions that impose substantial, easily measured harm on others even when the actions are of little benefit to themselves. Because such a right would be impossible to defend within the Coase framework, that choice would require them to reject Coase outright. But think what a difficult position that would be for an honest libertarian to defend! If you really care about freedom, how can you reject a framework that defines rights for the explicit purpose of mimicking as closely as possible the outcomes completely free people would have agreed to among themselves?

For the sake of discussion, I’m going to adopt the position of a libertarian who refuses to abandon Coase and try to explore further where that approach to rights leads us. Now, it’s one thing to agree in principle that costs and benefits matter in deciding which rights to defend. But it’s quite another matter to agree on how to measure the relevant costs and benefits. Few questions have spawned more disagreement among social theorists than that of how to weigh the competing claims of people whose interests are in conflict. In the next chapter, I'll argue that the Coase framework provides useful guidance for thinking about this question as well.
