Chapter 5. Putting the Positional Consumption Beast on a Diet.

The insight that individual incentives often conflict sharply with those of larger groups is nowhere more clearly illustrated than in the context of military arms races. Yet, despite its familiarity, the parable of the military arms race remains imperfectly understood.

The Logic of Military Arms Races

In a stripped-down version of an arms race, one nation gains advantage over a rival by building additional armaments, which prompts the rival to build additional armaments of its own to restore the balance. The first nation then acquires still more weaponry, provoking yet another response from its rival, and so on. When the dust settles, neither side enjoys greater security, despite having spent a substantial share of its national resources on armaments.

If we assume that the antagonists were evenly matched to begin with, there's essentially universal agreement that this process is wasteful. It would have been far better for both nations if each had spent less on arms and more on schools, housing, hospitals, roads, and other nonmilitary goods.

The standard solution is a military arms control agreement, under which both sides pledge to reduce their spending on armaments. Lack of trust is perhaps the biggest barrier to reaching such agreements, and successful ones have almost always granted liberal inspection rights to both sides. As Ronald Reagan liked to say, “Trust, but verify.”

So far, so good. But this account leaves an important question unanswered. What conditions must be met, exactly, for a military arms race to occur? If someone says there is too much of something, the unspoken implication is that there must be too little of something else. In the military arms race, there are too many bombs and not enough domestic consumption goods. But why was the imbalance in that direction and not the other way around? That is, why didn't nations try to outdo one another by building more and better hospitals and roads, in the process shortchanging their spending on armaments?

The answer to this question is both simple and instructive. It’s that, although context matters for a nation’s abilities to achieve its goals in both domains, it matters much more for armaments. In the two-nation example, the question of whether our stock of armaments is adequate depends almost entirely on how it compares with their stock. If theirs is bigger, our political independence is in jeopardy. If ours is bigger, we're safe. . Context matters for consumption goods, too, but much less than for military goods. Consumers may be displeased, for example, on learning that citizens of a rival nation have better TV sets and fancier cars. But such displeasure is far less costly than losing your political independence.

Except for this asymmetry, wed never see a military arms race. Suppose, in contrast, that context mattered more for consumption goods than for armaments. One nation might try to get ahead of its rival by building more bombs, but the immediate consequence would be to have less money available to spend on toasters. And if falling behind a rival nation in toasters were more costly than falling behind on armaments, there would be no tendency to build too many bombs in the first place. On the contrary, there would be a “positional arms race” focused on toasters. Each nation would spend more and more on toasters in an effort to outdo its rival, in the process siphoning off resources from its armaments sector. That this doesn't happen is purely a consequence of the fact that context matters more for weaponry than for consumption goods generally.

Several other points are worth noting about military arms races. One is that they don’t stem from irrational behavior. From the perspective of any individual nation, it’s perfectly sensible to place high priority on being as well armed as rivals. Maintaining your political independence depends on your ability to defend yourself, which would be jeopardized by having an inferior stock of armaments.

Nor do military arms races stem from any absence of competition. On the contrary, they have historically pitted nations against the rivals with whom they compete most directly for important resources. More intense competition among nations makes military arms races more likely, not less.

Nor, finally, is there anything mysterious about military arms control agreements. A libertarian would make a fool of himself by objecting to such agreements on the grounds that they rob signatories of the right to decide for themselves how many bombs to build. That's precisely their intent! The signatories embrace these agreements because they understand that if they retain the right to decide individually, they'll end up spending far too much on bombs.

Each of the features of military arms races described thus far is completely uncontroversial. But that doesn't mean that arms control agreements themselves are always uncontroversial. For example, it may be perfectly rational for a nation’s leaders to refuse to participate in such an agreement if they have no practical way to prevent the opposing side from cheating.

It may also be rational to refuse to sign an arms control agreement if leaders believe an arms race would play out to their own side’s advantage. Ronald Reagan, for example, was said to have embraced the development of strategic missile defense systems in the 1980s in part because he believed that pressuring the USSR to follow suit would hasten the economic collapse of America’s principal rival.

In sum, there’s all but universal agreement that military arms races between closely matched rivals are wasteful, and that all parties can gain from collective agreements to limit spending on armaments. When nations are reluctant to enter into such agreements, it’s generally because of practical concerns linked to verifiability or resource asymmetries. They don’t refuse to sign military arms control agreements because of abstract philosophical concerns about the value of maintaining their freedom of individual action. Arms Races in Other Domains

As in the domain of military competition, so also in the domain of economic competition. In sports, for example, both individual and team rewards depend heavily on relative performance. If one sprinter takes anabolic steroids, he improves his chances to land a spot on the medal stand. If a team bids successfully for an outstanding player, it’s more likely to win a championship. There are also obvious downsides to these moves. Steroid users confront serious long-term health risks, for example, and bidding for star players is costly. But from each individual’s or team’s perspective, the gains loom large relative to the losses. The rub, of course, is that if all sprinters take steroids or if all teams bid for star players, all pay a price, yet none gains a competitive edge.

As in the domain of military competition, the solution in sports has been to forge positional arms control agreements. Some governing bodies conduct random drug tests and impose stiff sanctions on violators. Other leagues impose salary caps and roster limits in an effort to limit payrolls. Soapbox derby organizers impose spending limits. Auto racing associations impose engine displacement limits. And so on. Each of these restrictions is an attempt to solve a problem exactly analogous to a military arms race. Libertarians apart, there don't seem to be many people who view such steps as deeply troubling violations of individual rights.

When teams or individual competitors fail to implement positional arms control agreements, it’s often for practical reasons similar to those that prevent military arms control agreements. The late New York Yankees owner George M. Steinbrenner, for example, successfully fought off attempts by other baseball owners to impose greater revenue sharing and stricter salary caps in Major League Baseball. Steinbrenner had access to New York’s enormous local cable television revenue stream, which he knew would enable him to outbid other teams for star free agents. He also knew that although blocking salary caps and revenue sharing would substantially increase each team’s payroll, including his own, maintaining his ability to field consistently winning teams would more than compensate for that disadvantage.

Steinbrenner’s opposition to salary caps and revenue sharing imposed substantial costs on other team owners, and ultimately on fans. In the economist’s parlance, those policies created “positional externalities.”

All this, again, is familiar and uncontroversial. Much less familiar, however, is the fact that similar positional externalities produce analogous waste in everyday consumption spending patterns. In chapter 4, I discussed pressures that have led people to spend wastefully on housing and celebrations of special occasions. But implicit in that claim is a parallel claim that they must be spending too little on at least some other things. What are those other things, and why do people spend too little on them? The logic that governs military arms races suggests a systematic way of exploring these questions.

Context Matters More in Some Domains Than Others

A series of simple thought experiments provides a convenient way to evoke intuitions about the importance of context in different settings. In each case, you're asked to imagine the choice between two situations that are identical in all respects except for the one difference explicitly described. You're also supposed to assume that the two situations will remain as described forever.

The first thought experiment explores the importance of context for evaluations of housing:

Which world would you choose?

World A: You live in a neighborhood with 6,000-square-foot houses, others in neighborhoods with 8,000-square-foot houses;

or,

World B: You live in a neighborhood with 4,000-square-foot houses, others in neighborhoods with 3,000-square-foot houses.

Even by current standards in the United States, all the options in this thought experiment involve houses that are large in absolute terms. Again, don't assume that you could go to world A and move up to a neighborhood with larger houses by working a little harder. Choosing A means being in a relatively small house forever.

The standard economic models that underlie Adam Smith’s invisible-hand theory say that this choice should be a no-brainer. In those models, context doesn’t matter at all. Your evaluation of your house is assumed to depend only on its absolute characteristics, and since you'd have a bigger one in world A, that’s necessarily the better choice. Yet when actual people are asked to make this choice, it’s not a slam-dunk. Typically they take a while to think things over, and most end up picking world B.

Now consider a second thought experiment with exactly the same structure:

Which world would you choose?

World A: Your probability of dying on the job is 2 in 10,000 each year; others’ is 1 in 10,000;

or,

World B: Your probability of dying on the job is 4 in 10,000 each year; others’ is 8 in 10,000.

Like the first thought experiment, this one gives you a chance to choose between absolute and relative advantage. If you pick world A, your absolute probability of dying on the job each year will be only half as great as in world B. But your job in A would be the more dangerous job there, whereas your job in B would be the safer one in that world.

I have posed this thought experiment in numerous classes, with students ranging from freshmen to retirees. In almost every case, 100 percent of subjects chose world A. Unlike the first thought experiment, subjects in this one voice a consistent preference for absolute advantage over relative advantage.

What does this pattern tell us? When describing the reasons for their choices, the majority of subjects who chose B in the first experiment typically say they thought they'd be more likely to feel satisfied with their house in that world, even though it was smaller in absolute terms. Absolute house size also matters, of course, but once it crosses a certain threshold, context seems to loom larger in most people’s evaluations.

Similar follow-up discussions with subjects about their choice in the second thought experiment make clear that they wouldn't like the fact that their chosen job would entail twice the risk of other jobs in world A. But typically they're quick to add that they'd much prefer to live with that fact than to choose B, where their job would be twice as risky as in A.

Following terminology coined by the late economist Fred Hirsch, the modal choices in these thought experiments identify housing as a “positional good” and workplace safety as a “nonpositional good.” Positional goods are ones whose evaluations are particularly sensitive to context. Since evidence suggests that context matters for virtually every evaluation, a positional good is thus one whose evaluation is relatively heavily shaped by context. In contrast, a nonpositional good is one whose evaluation depends relatively weakly on context.

As we saw in the example of the military arms race, a wasteful distortion results when context matters more in some domains than others. Nations tend to build too many bombs because the adequacy of their arsenals depends heavily on how they compare in size with those of rivals. Context matters for consumption goods, too, but much less so than for armaments.

The same logic implies a wasteful distortion toward spending on positional goods. Let’s flesh out the details of how that distortion would unfold for the specific categories considered in the two thought experiments— namely housing and workplace safety. Both are desirable, and both are costly to produce. As discussed in chapter 3, the standard invisible-hand story holds that competitive markets allow workers to purchase the mix of safety and housing that best suits them. If they're highly averse to risk, they can choose a safer job, but that means a lower wage (since blade guards on saws are costly), which in turn means having less to spend on housing. Or, if risk doesn't much bother them, they can opt for a higher wage in a riskier job, which will enable them to spend more on housing.

Libertarians and other invisible-hand enthusiasts argue that when government regulates safety in the workplace, it makes workers worse off by forcing them to buy more safety than they'd have chosen to buy on their own. Consider, for example, the decision confronting someone trying to decide whether to accept a riskier job at higher pay so he can buy a more expensive house. The standard invisible-hand story says he'll accept the job if the value of the extra absolute house size outweighs the cost of having lower absolute safety. So he'll accept risk only up to the point at which the last small increment in absolute house size was worth just enough to cover the cost of the last small decrement in absolute safety. Forcing him to buy more safety than that, say the invisible-hand proponents, would be to force him to buy safety that’s worth less to him than he must pay for it.

But that claim no longer holds if evaluations of housing are more contextsensitive than evaluations of safety. To see why, note that when context matters, two additional factors enter the cost-benefit calculus. Taking the riskier job will not only put the worker in an absolutely bigger house, it will also put him in a relatively bigger one; the same decision also means having less safety, both in absolute terms and relative to other workers.

Adding context to the story matters because the two new terms in the decision are strikingly asymmetric. Having a relatively expensive house matters a lot, if only because it enables you to send your children to better schools. In contrast, having a relatively unsafe job is of only secondary concern. Adding the two relative terms to the traditional account thus tilts the decision sharply in favor of accepting the riskier job. That’s problematic because the relative advantage people seek is mutually offsetting. No matter how many workers accept riskier jobs hoping to move forward in relative terms, there can never be more than 50 percent of them in the top half.

That simple observation deals a heavy blow to traditional invisible-hand claims. Even when all decision makers are fully informed and perfectly rational, and even when all labor and product markets are perfectly competitive, there can be no presumption that the invisible hand of the marketplace leads to outcomes that are best for society as a whole. If housing is positional and safety is nonpositional, as evidence consistently suggests, unregulated markets will serve up houses that are too big and jobs that are too dangerous.

If workers respond by electing legislators who enact regulations that limit workplace safety risks, it makes no sense for libertarians and others to complain that such regulations strip workers of the right to decide for themselves how much risk to take. If illusory relative gains are what drove individual decisions to accept additional risk in the first place, those decisions are perhaps better made collectively. Complaining that regulations restrict the freedom of individual workers is thus little different from complaining that helmet rules restrict the freedom of individual hockey players. Yes, they do—but that’s the whole point in each case.

Of course, the mere fact that a market outcome is less than perfect does not mean that government intervention would necessarily lead to a better outcome. Governments are imperfect, too. The important point is that the ultimate decision about whether regulation makes sense should hinge on purely practical questions about the efficacy of proposed regulatory remedies. Slogans about the absolute primacy of individual freedom don't help answer such questions.

The lesson of the arms race metaphor is that we have too much positional consumption and not enough nonpositional consumption. But which goods are positional and which are nonpositional? The Darwinian framework provides guidance for thinking about this question. The ultimate measure of success within that framework is the individual’s ability to pass copies of its genes into the next generation. A category is thus more likely to be positional in proportion to the extent to which additional investment in that category makes individual reproductive success more likely.

The antlers of the bull elk, for example, are advantageous only insofar as they help their bearers win battles for access to females, and that advantage in turn depends almost entirely on their relative size. Larger antlers are purchased at the expense of reduced mobility in densely wooded areas, which makes a bull more likely to be killed by wolves or other predators. But greater mobility would be cold comfort, in purely Darwinian terms, if it were purchased at the expense of relatively small antlers, for the genes of such a bull would be unlikely to make it into the next generation. For the bull elk, then, antlers are a positional good and mobility a nonpositional good. And that’s why bull elk as a group overinvest in antlers and underinvest in mobility.

The Darwinian perspective provides similar guidance for assessing other investment opportunities. Suppose, for example, that the question is whether spending time generating additional income is more positional than spending that same time at leisure. As noted earlier, famines were a frequent occurrence when the human nervous system was evolving, and although there was always some food available, only those with the highest relative incomes were certain to get fed. Someone who was more strongly motivated to achieve high rank in the leisure distribution would thus have been more likely to starve than someone who was more strongly motivated to achieve high rank in the income distribution. So the Darwinian framework predicts that income should be more positional than leisure.

This prediction is consistent with the pattern of responses to a thought experiment similar to the two discussed earlier:

Which world would you choose?

World A: You have four weeks of vacation each year; others have six weeks;

or,

World B: You have two weeks of vacation each year; others have one week.

Given these choices, most respondents pick world A, thus voicing a preference for absolute advantage over relative advantage. Follow-up discussions suggest that most respondents wouldn't be pleased about having shorter vacations than others, but rather than give up half their vacation time, they'd prefer to live with that fact.

Similar logic predicts that other nonmaterial consumption amenities, such as freedom from noise and pollution, should also be less positional than the income sacrifices that are required to obtain them.’ By the same token, workplace amenities—such as grievance procedures, additional variety of tasks, and comfort features—should be less positional than the wage cuts necessary to obtain them.

In contrast, the Darwinian perspective suggests that investments related to the raising of offspring should tend to be highly positional. Expenditure categories that are more easily observed—such as those for cars, clothing, and jewelry—should also tend to be more positional than those that cannot be observed, such as those for insurance.

Savings, too, cannot be observed easily, and for that reason would be predicted to be nonpositional. Working against that prediction, however, is the fact that saving less today means having less to spend on positional consumption in the future. But the general human tendency to discount future costs and benefits too heavily cuts the other way. Saving less today means less positional consumption tomorrow, yes, but a current deficit can be experienced directly, whereas a future deficit can only be imagined. More important, many expenditures early in life, such as buying a house in a good school district while children are young, are inherently more positional than those occurring later. Younger parents might plausibly say to themselves, “Let's send the children to the best schools we can now and worry about retirement when the time comes.” On balance, then, the prediction is that savings is nonpositional.”

Public goods would also be predicted to be nonpositional by virtue of one of the basic properties that defines them. Unlike private goods, for which quantities and qualities can vary for different people, public goods are provided in the same quantity and quality to everyone. So they cannot be a source of relative advantage.

These predictions are largely consistent with empirical evidence reported across a broad range of studies.* They’re also consistent with existing patterns of regulation, taxation, and public expenditure worldwide. Regulations as Data Regulations are data. Antigovernment activists insist that all regulation is bad, and there are certainly many vivid examples of bad regulation. But it’s instructive to consider the alternative hypothesis that many regulations exist for good reasons. Taking that view, we can learn something about how things work by observing the kinds of regulations that democratically elected representatives choose to implement.

Most jurisdictions in the United States, for example, require a child to start kindergarten in a given school year if he or she will have turned 5 years of age before a specified date during the fall term of that year. What’s the purpose of this regulation? If parents were free to choose their own child’s enrollment date, each might see advantage in holding their child back a year. he'd then be older, smarter, bigger, stronger, and more emotionally mature than his classmates. And since school performance is graded on the curve, he'd be more likely to do well, more likely to succeed in athletic competition, more likely to win admission to a selective university, and so on. But once some parents began “redshirting” their kindergartners, others would feel pressure to do likewise. In the end, most children might start school a few years older, but no more of them than before would win admission to selective universities. Under the circumstances, it’s easy to see why people might want their elected representatives to impose mandatory kindergarten start dates.

Most societies around the world also regulate workplace safety. Most have programs either to stimulate additional savings or to compensate for the fact that many people retire with inadequate savings. Many countries have programs that attempt to equalize expenditures on schooling across different geographic areas. Most make some attempt to limit the workweek, and many set minimum requirements for worker vacation allowances.

Such regulations are squarely consistent with the hypothesis that private expenditure patterns are distorted by the fact that evaluation is more sensitive to context in some domains than in others. And as I have argued elsewhere, most competing explanations for these regulations are selfcontradictory.° Many suffer from the no-cash-on-the-table objection discussed in chapter 3. If markets are as competitive as evidence suggests, and if evaluation were equally sensitive to context across domains, there should be little need for most of these regulations. The invisible hand would have taken care of everything.

The Progressive Consumption Tax

Prescriptive regulation is fortunately not the only way to alter wasteful consumption patterns. If the problem is that people spend too much on positional consumption and not enough on nonpositional consumption, the least intrusive way to right that imbalance is by altering the relevant prices. In a world of complete information and perfect government, we could simply set a different tax rate for every good in accordance with the extent to which context shapes its evaluation. The most positional goods would be taxed most heavily, the next-most positional goods would be taxed at slightly lower rates, and so on.

But although researchers have begun to estimate the differences in the extent to which context influences demands for specific categories of goods,® existing knowledge is far too fragmentary to support such an ambitious approach. Even if we knew much more about these magnitudes, it would be politically costly to establish a separate tax rate for every good. Lobbyists would inundate legislators with studies purporting to show why their particular client’s product or service was nonpositional and therefore entitled to tax-exempt status.

In earlier work I have argued that a simpler, more promising, approach would be to abandon the current progressive income tax in favor of a much more steeply progressive general consumption tax.’ This approach rests on the observation that positional concerns are stronger for luxuries than necessities. There are obvious pitfalls in trying to identify specific goods as luxuries. But given that luxury is an inherently context-dependent phenomenon, it's uncontroversial to say that the last dollars spent by those who spend most are most likely to be spent on luxuries. A steeply progressive consumption tax is thus a luxury tax that completely sidesteps the need to identify specific goods as luxuries.

Implementing a progressive consumption tax would be straightforward.*® Taxpayers would report their incomes to the tax authorities just as they do now. they'd also report how much they had saved during the year, much as they do now for IRAs and other tax-exempt retirement accounts. People would then pay tax on their “taxable consumption,” which is just the difference between their income and their annual savings, less a standard deduction.’ Rates at the margin would rise with taxable consumption. If the tax were revenue-neutral, marginal rates at the top would be significantly higher than current marginal tax rates on income, to make up for the revenue lost by exempting savings. But if we want to repair crumbling infrastructure, round up loose nukes in the former Soviet Union, and bring the government budget into balance as the baby boomers retire, we'll need additional tax revenue. That would require still higher top marginal rates.

Proposals to generate additional income tax revenue by raising top marginal rates invariably summon concern about possible negative effects on the incentive to save and invest. Under a progressive consumption tax, by contrast, people’s incentives would be to save and invest more, even if top marginal tax rates on consumption were extremely high.

If the direct effect of the tax were to induce top spenders to save more, it would also affect the spending of others indirectly. Each individual's spending, after all, constitutes part of the frame of reference that influences what others spend. And given the importance of context, the indirect effects of a progressive consumption tax promise to be considerably larger than the direct effects.

The expenditure cascades discussed in chapter 4 have pressured many middle-income families to spend beyond their means. If people at the top were to save more and spend less on mansions, that would shift the frame of reference that influences the housing expenditures of those just below them. So they, too, would spend less on housing, and so on all the way down the income ladder. People at the top would also spend less to celebrate special occasions. they'd spend less on gifts. they'd spend less on jewelry. Those changes, too, would produce similar indirect effects.

By all available evidence, that would be a good thing. The aggregate household savings rate in the United States was negative during both 2005 and 2006. Americans were actually spending more than they earned during full calendar years for the first time since the Great Depression. Low savings rates helped precipitate the financial crisis that brought the global economy to its knees in 2008. For decades, liberals and conservatives alike have agreed that we would all be better off if we all spent less and saved and invested more. But no individual has the power to alter the aggregate savings rate. If we want to increase it, we must act collectively. A progressive consumption tax would be the perfect policy instrument for that purpose.

It would raise needed revenue while simultaneously reducing the incidence of behavior that causes harm to others. A CEO who spent $10 million to stage a coming-of-age party for his daughter may have had no intention of harming others. But his action caused harm nonetheless. By shifting the frame of reference that defines what constitutes a special occasion, it confronted others with a difficult choice. They could either increase their own spending or hold the line, courting the impression that they didn’t appreciate the occasion’s significance. Many ten-year-olds in middle-income families are now disappointed if their parents don't hire a clown or magician to perform at their birthday parties. And since there’s absolutely no evidence that children are happier in the wake of across-the-board increases in spending on parties, it would be bizarre to insist that shifting this particular frame of reference caused no harm to others.

As we'll see in the next chapter, people's interest in not being harmed by the actions of others must of course be weighed against the cost to others of restricting their freedom of action. It’s here that the progressive consumption tax really shines. For example, consider a family that is currently spending $10 million a year and is considering a $2 million addition to its mansion. If the top marginal tax rate on consumption were 100 percent, the project would cost $4 million. If the family went ahead with the project exactly as planned, its additional tax payment would reduce the federal deficit by $2 million.

Alternatively, it could scale back, building only a $1 million addition. It would then pay $1 million in additional tax and could deposit $2 million more in savings than if it had built the original plan. The federal deficit would fall by s1 million, and the additional savings would stimulate investment, promoting growth. Either way, no real sacrifice would be required of the wealthy family, because if all wealthy families had gone ahead with their original plans, the result would have been merely to redefine what constitutes acceptable housing.

The important point is that the utility from consumption at extremely high levels is almost purely positional. A tax that encourages top earners to save more and spend less thus has virtually no direct negative effect on those who face the tax. On the contrary, as noted in chapter 4, an across-the-board reduction in the growth of the largest mansions might well leave top earners feeling happier than they'd have been on the current trajectory. Tending to a big mansion is a hassle.

Libertarians of all people should be positively disposed to using taxes, rather than prescriptive regulation, to curb the impact of behavior that causes harm to others. The tax approach doesn't forbid someone from doing what he wants; it merely makes doing it more expensive. The advantage of using taxes to curb positional externalities is thus exactly analogous to the advantage of using effluent fees to curb environmental pollution.

In the environmental domain, firms for which pollution reduction is most expensive may find it in their interest to continue to pollute even after the imposition of an effluent tax. Similarly, those families for whom consumption reductions would be especially difficult may respond to higher tax rates by expending additional effort in order to maintain their previous spending levels. But in both the environmental and consumption domains, the harm were trying to prevent depends more on overall activity levels than on the activity levels of particular individuals or firms. And just as the imposition of effluent charges mitigates pollution damage by leading most firms to curtail pollution, a progressive consumption tax would mitigate the costs of positional externalities by increasing the incentive to save.

Despite the gaps in current knowledge about positional concerns, recent experience provides some insight into how switching to a steeply progressive consumption tax might affect social welfare. Compared to the current income tax, such a tax would reduce high-end consumption and increase public spending. If affluent consumers are generally rational, private spending reductions would be concentrated in the categories they consider least urgent. Political imperfections notwithstanding, governments would spend at least some of the resulting tax revenue on the public services that voters value most. The practical question, then, is whether the loss from cutting the least urgent high-end private consumption categories would outweigh the gain from increasing the most highly valued public services. To be sure, it’s possible to imagine a society so poor in private consumption and so rich in public consumption that such a switch would reduce welfare. But what about societies with high levels of private consumption and low levels of public services, like the United States in recent years?

In the absence of detailed empirical evidence, a plausible conjecture is that the first expenditures that high-end consumers would reduce in response to a steeply progressive consumption tax are the same ones they have recently been increasing most rapidly in response to their growing incomes. As discussed in chapter 4, some of the most spectacular increases in highend consumption in recent years have occurred in housing and the events families use to mark special occasions. By all accounts, such expenditures are hyperpositional.

Facing high marginal tax rates on consumption, the wealthiest families would surely spend less on parties for their children. If they did, the standards that define a special occasion in their circle would shift accordingly. Could anyone argue with a straight face that these changes would constitute a significant welfare loss for the children involved?

What about the welfare impact of the public services made possible by additional revenue from a steeply progressive consumption tax? Even allowing for the fact that some of the extra revenue would be spent wastefully, much of the rest would pay for useful things. For example, we could repair unsafe bridges like the one on Interstate 35 that collapsed into the Mississippi River in downtown Minneapolis on August 1, 2007, killing 13 people and injuring 145. We could inspect the cargo containers that currently enter the nation’s ports without scrutiny.

Limited empirical knowledge does not always prevent us from drawing reasonable inferences about the likely welfare effects of specific tax policy changes. Most economists would agree that the welfare cost to wealthy families of having smaller and less expensive mansions would be smaller than their benefit from having safer roads and improved security. If so, the benefit of those upgrades to the nonwealthy would be pure gravy.

These observations provide reasons beyond those I will discuss in chapter 10 to question the traditional assumption that tax policy confronts us with an agonizing trade-off between equity and efficiency. If context shapes spending patterns in the ways suggested by available evidence, higher marginal tax rates on top earners would appear justified not only on grounds of equity, but also on grounds of narrow economic efficiency.

A Political Pipe Dream?

I have been advocating the progressive consumption tax for many years. When my liberal friends hear me talk about it, they often say it sounds like a promising idea, but they are usually quick to add that it’s politically unthinkable. Given the strength of the antitax, antigovernment rhetorical framework that shapes political discourse in the United States, it’s easy to share their pessimism. But at some point, refusal to consider fundamental tax reform will cease to be a viable option. We can continue to borrow and cut back essential public services for a while longer. But not forever. And when the moment of reckoning comes, there are good reasons to view the progressive consumption tax as a promising candidate for adoption.

A version of this tax was actually introduced in the U.S. Senate in 1995 under the bipartisan sponsorship of Sam Nunn (D, GA) and Pete Domenici (R, NM). Other budget battles kept their bill from reaching the top of the agenda, but others have continued to tout similar proposals in the years since. Shortly after I published an article advocating adoption of the progressive consumption tax in 1997," I received a warm letter from Milton Friedman, who, until his death in 2006, was the patron saint of smallgovernment conservatism in the United States. The federal budget was on the verge of running large surpluses then, and Friedman wrote that he didn't share my view that the government should be raising more revenue. But he went on to add that if the government did need additional revenue, the progressive consumption tax would be far and away the best way to raise it. He enclosed a reprint of an article he himself had published in the 1943 volume of the American Economic Review in which he advocated this tax as the best way to pay for the war effort."

Many other conservatives have advocated a flat tax or value-added tax, which are essentially national sales taxes. But because the rich save much larger shares of their incomes than the poor, such taxes are extremely regressive. Taxing all consumption at a uniform rate would actually put more disposable income into the hands of the nation’s top earners, which would exacerbate the expenditure cascades described in chapter 4. Those cascades are launched by increased spending at the top. Steering resources to more productive uses will require fairly high marginal consumption tax rates on the biggest spenders. That’s possible under a progressive consumption tax but not under a value-added tax.

The economist Laurence Seidman has proposed that a good first step toward the adoption of a progressive consumption tax would be to retain the current income tax for now while supplementing it with a progressive consumption surtax.'’ Under his proposal, families with adjusted gross incomes less than $1 million would be completely exempt from the surtax. Those with higher incomes would document their annual savings and calculate their annual consumption expenditure as the difference between their annual income and that amount. A progressive surtax would then be levied only on their consumption in excess of $500,000." Over time, the income tax could be completely transformed into a progressive consumption tax by gradually lowering the threshold for the surtax.

An added attraction of Seidman’s proposal is that it would create a temporary spending boom for a sluggish economy that could really use it. The key step would be to pass the surtax right away, but delay its implementation until the economy was once again operating near full employment. Mere announcement that the tax was coming would spur a flood of additional high-end spending as wealthy families rushed to build mansion additions and stage lavish parties before the tax took effect. Granted, that might not be the best way to stimulate additional spending. But it would clearly be better than standing idly by while total spending remains far too low to support full employment.

In the long run, a progressive consumption tax would gradually shift the composition of final spending away from consumption toward investment, causing productivity to grow more rapidly. In the event of an economic downturn, a temporary suspension or reduction of the tax would be a powerful stimulus tool, since consumers would benefit only if they increased their spending right away. In contrast, temporary income tax cuts tend to be a weak stimulus tool, because fearful consumers often save them.

Movement libertarians can of course be expected to denounce the progressive consumption tax in the same harsh terms they reserve for other taxes. Theft! Social engineering! Frank thinks the bureaucrats in Washington know how to spend our money more wisely than we do! Class warfare!

But mature adults understand that we must tax something. Right now we tax savings, which discourages productive investment. We tax payrolls, which discourages job creation. Instead, why not tax things that we would otherwise have too much of?
