Chapter 7. Efficiency Rules.

The development of money was a Critical step that facilitated the diviles and specialization of labor, a process that enabled per-capita income to grow thousandsfold during the past several centuries. Money has also been indispensable as a unit of account for deciding which of two competing interests should prevail.

Thus, in Ronald Coase’s example of the factory owner whose machinery disrupted the neighboring doctor’s practice, the best solution to the problem was easily identified by comparing the factory owner’s monetary cost of soundproofing his machines to the doctor’s monetary cost of moving to a quiet location. The incomes of the two parties were completely irrelevant for that comparison, although their incomes would clearly be affected by how the law chose to assign responsibility for noise damage.

How Income Differences Affect the Cost-Benefit Test

But sometimes the incomes of parties affected by harmful activities play a direct role in determining the least costly solution to the problem. Suppose, for example, that Sarah likes to play her violin at night, which disturbs her neighbor Sam. Should the law restrain Sarah's playing? To keep the discussion simple, let's suppose that legislators are considering only two options— banning music after 10:00 pM on weeknights or banning it after 11:00 pM. To decide which alternative would ameliorate the problem at lower cost, legislators would need two pieces of information: (1) the value to Sarah of being able to continue playing until 11:00 rather than having to stop an hour earlier and (2) the value to Sam of having Sara stop playing at 10:00 rather than an hour later.

Sarah would obviously like to be able to continue playing until 11:00, but how strongly does she feel about it? To most economists, the answer to this question is simple in principle, if not always easy to come up with in practice. It’s the largest amount shed be willing to pay to maintain her right to play until 11:00. Economists would answer the question of how much Sam values the right to have quiet starting at 10:00 in a similar way. It’s the largest amount he'd be willing to pay to secure that right. Economists realize, of course, that if the two parties were simply asked how much they were willing to pay, they'd have clear incentives to overstate their responses if they knew that the timing of the noise ordinance depended on them. So as a practical matter, economists often try to infer how much the respective parties would be willing to pay from indirect behavioral evidence—perhaps by comparing property values in otherwise similar communities whose noise ordinances kick in at different times.

But practical measurement problems would be the least controversial aspect of any proposal to base the solution to a noise problem on a comparison of the amounts that affected parties are willing to pay to have their way. Far more troubling would be the fact that willingness to pay depends so heavily on ability to pay. How much people would be willing to pay for an extra hour of quiet, or for the right to continue playing music for an extra hour, depends on many things—including their feelings about music, the thickness of their apartment walls, and their work schedules. But willingness to pay also depends heavily on income. Holding all else constant, the more people earn, the more they’re willing to pay to have their way.

The upshot is that Coase’s approach to solving the noise problem will tend to tilt heavily in favor of the solutions preferred by those who have the most money. Suppose, for example, that Sarah feels extremely strongly about being able to practice until 11:00, but her meager income enables her to pay at most $8 a day for the right to do so. And suppose that Sam is really not much disturbed by Sarah's playing in the evening, but because he is extremely wealthy he'd be willing to pay $15 a day for the right to silence after 10:00. The Coase framework would then hold that the efficient solution to the problem would be to adopt an ordinance that prohibits noise after 10:00 PM. Yet when I polled a class of more than ninety graduate students about what should be done in this example, more than eighty thought the noise curfew should begin at 11:00.

When the 1960 Coase paper first appeared, much of the negative reaction from critics on the left was prompted by the perception that measuring costs and benefits by willingness to pay was morally tone-deaf, a gross violation of the principle that citizens should have equal rights irrespective of their incomes. But despite the intuitively compelling attraction of this statement, it’s misguided. As we'll see, it accounts for our repeated failure to implement policies that would benefit all citizens, rich and poor alike.

Most people actually seem willing to accept the fact that willingness to pay determines who gets what in private markets. If a painting is being auctioned, for example, and many people want it, the one who’s willing to pay the most gets it. Willingness to pay is also decisive when cost-benefit analysis guides public decisions. But its use in the public sphere is more controversial—so much so that we often reject the recommendations of traditional cost-benefit analyses in major public policy decisions.

All Talk or All Music?

A simple example conveys the flavor of some of the issues at stake. Suppose a community must decide whether to switch the format of its public radio station from all music to all talk. To keep things simple, we'll assume that the two formats cost the same and all voters are indifferent between them except for the following three: One wealthy voter favors the switch and, with equal intensity, two poor voters oppose it. But because of their income differences, the rich voter would be willing to pay $1,000 to see the change enacted, while the poor voters would be willing to pay only $100 each to prevent it. Should the switch be made?

According to standard cost-benefit analysis, the benefit of making the switch is the $1,000 the rich voter would be willing to pay for it. Its cost is $200, the sum of what the two poor voters would be willing to pay to avoid it. The net benefit of making the switch is thus $800. The cost-benefit rule recommends adopting all options whose benefits exceed their costs. This rule thus says unequivocally that the format switch should be made.

Critics object, however, that using the cost-benefit test to resolve such issues offends the aforementioned important democratic value that each citizen’ interests are entitled to equal weight in the eyes of the law. In the example just discussed, each interested party was assumed to feel equally strongly about the format switch. So why, critics ask, should the preferences of one wealthy voter trump those of two poor voters?

The question has obvious rhetorical force. There is something troubling about the prescription of cost-benefit analysis in such cases. This concern has made many governments reluctant to rely on it. Executive orders issued during the Clinton administration, for example, instructed Federal agency heads to temper the results of cost-benefit analysis by distributional considerations.’ If we were to completely temper willingness to pay by ability to pay, the cost-benefit test in our radio example would become a simple head count. The proposed switch from all music to all talk would fail by a 2-1 margin.

Is that the right outcome? The question is not whether the prescription of cost-benefit analysis is troubling in some way, but whether some alternative decision rule would yield a better outcome.

One obvious consequence of abandoning cost-benefit analysis in this example is that failure to switch formats results in a net loss of $800—the difference between the $1,000 benefit forgone by the rich voter and the $200 in combined losses avoided by the two poor voters. That loss could easily be avoided. For example, the switch could be made conditional on the rich voter’s payment of additional taxes of, say, $500, which could then be used to reduce the taxes of each poor voter by $250. Relative to the status quo, this move would improve the welfare of each voter.

The rich voter may complain about having to pay extra taxes. But from her perspective, the alternative would be even worse. The $1,000 benefit she gets from the format switch is more than enough to compensate her for the additional levy. Similarly, although the two poor voters will not be pleased about losing their preferred all-music format, the alternative would be worse for them, too. By their own testimony, each is more than adequately compensated for the format change by the $250 tax reduction. Without the income transfer, all parties lose.

Movement libertarians—not to mention a multitude of others—object that the government cannot legitimately impose such transfers. (“It's your money, and the government has no right to take if from you and give it to the poor!”) But although this objection is commonly attacked on equity grounds, it’s perhaps more transparently vulnerable on efficiency grounds.

In a democratic society, the interests of poor voters will receive attention one way or another. As in the example just discussed, ruling out income transfers often means that those interests will be addressed in other, more costly ways. Permitting such transfers, by contrast, creates the possibility of crafting policies that will advance the economic interests of rich and poor alike. Yet we cannot identify or implement those policies unless we're free to rely much more fully than we do now on willingness to pay; and this freedom can often be purchased only at the expense of a greater willingness to employ income transfers.

Willingness to pay, as noted, is more widely accepted as a basis for who gets what in the private sector than in the public sector. Yet even in the private sector, reliance on willingness to pay sometimes offends cherished values. But here, too, the central question must be not whether willingness to pay results in the best possible allocation, but rather whether some practical alternative could yield a better one. As the following example will make clear, willingness to pay has much to commend it, even when it leads to outcomes that offend in some ways.

Who Should Get the Rare Clock?

Imagine an antique shop with a 1905 Stickley grandfather clock on display in its storefront window. Two potential buyers want it: Susan, a fourth grade teacher who’ an aficionado of early twentieth-century grandfather clocks, and Malcolm, a wealthy personal injury lawyer who has no particular interest in clocks from that era or any other. Susan regularly attends seminars on antiques and has always dreamed of finding a Stickley in her price range. Malcolm happened to be in the neighborhood purely by chance when he saw the clock and thought it might look good in his office waiting room. Susan, a single mother of two who earns $28,000 a year, would be willing to pay up to $5,000 to own this clock. From her perspective, this is a large sum indeed, one that clearly bespeaks her eagerness to own it. Malcolm earns $950,000 a year. Even though he doesn't care very much about the clock, he'd nonetheless be willing to pay $10,000 to have it. And in a market system, Malcolm's greater willingness to pay assures that he'll get it.

Many people, including even many fans of the free-enterprise system, harbor strong intuitions that this can't be the best outcome. After all, the clock promises an enduring stream of deep satisfaction for Susan, but would appear largely wasted on Malcolm. Despite these misgivings, many might nonetheless accept the market outcome, because they see no practical way to make use of informal information about intensity of preference of the sort assumed in the example. For instance, it would hardly be practical to allocate goods and services on the basis of what people say about how desperately they wish to own them.

Yet a much less equivocal defense of willingness to pay can be offered even in this example. Granted, Susan cares more about this clock than Malcolm does. But if we take at face value what the two say about how much they'd be willing to pay for the clock, it really would not be better for her to own it. The reason is that she also has more urgent uses than Malcolm for virtually everything else that money might buy. Because Malcolm earns so much more than she does, the marginal dollar he spends in each arena addresses a less urgent need than the same dollar would for Susan. Being able to move to a house in a safer neighborhood or in a better school district, for example, would make more of a difference in Susan's case than in Malcolm’s—not because Malcolm doesn't care about those issues, but because he already lives in a safe neighborhood with good schools. If Susan were given the clock, her best option—according to her own valuation of it— would be to sell it to Malcolm.” He’s willing, after all, to pay more than the clock’s $5,000 value to Susan. By saying shed pay up to $5,000 for the clock, Susan is saying that the clock is extremely important to her, but not more important than the other things she could buy with the same $5,000.

Suppose Malcolm ends up buying the clock for $8,000. Susan might feel bitterly disappointed about not having felt able to buy it. But by her own assessment, shed have felt even more disappointed about not having the other things that $8,000 would buy. If we credit their statements about how much they’re willing to pay for the clock, then it must be better for both parties—Malcolm and Susan—if Malcolm ends up with it. And since they're the only two interested parties, that should settle the matter.

That doesn't mean that this is the best outcome anyone might imagine. It’s hardly far-fetched, for example, to suppose that the world would be better if the distribution of purchasing power were somewhat less skewed. If, for example, teachers earned $75,000 a year and personal injury lawyers earned $200,000, Susan might have outbid Malcolm for the clock, since Malcolm cared so much less about it than she did. But given that the income distribution is what it is, the best available outcome is for Malcolm to get the clock.

As this example illustrates, the size of the economic pie is maximized when scarce goods are allocated on the basis of willingness to pay, notwithstanding the fact that using that criterion may offend in some way. If we allocate on some basis other than willingness to pay, it will always be possible, as in the clock and radio examples, to find a rearrangement that benefits every party. The underlying principle is that when the economic pie grows larger, everyone can have a larger slice. Rich and poor thus have a shared interest in making the economic pie as large as possible, and that means relying on willingness to pay for allocation decisions.

Who Should Wait When a Flight Is Qversold?

The attractiveness of willingness to pay becomes even more transparent in the context of the question of how to allocate seats on overbooked commercial airline flights. Its common practice for commercial air carriers to issue more reservations for specific flights than those flights can accommodate. By so doing, they limit the number of empty seats that result when passengers fail to claim their reservations. Although overbooking thus helps keep fares down, there is also an obvious downside—namely that on a small proportion of flights, more passengers actually show up than there are seats on the plane.

Suppose, for instance, that 260 people have shown up for a flight from New York to Los Angeles with only 250 seats. Among the 260 are John, the second passenger to arrive at the gate, and Eric, the 255th. John is an office custodian on his way to visit his gravely ill mother in Los Angeles. If he misses this flight, he'll have to wait ten hours for the next available one. he'd be willing to pay $350 to avoid missing his flight. Eric was one of the last passengers to arrive, not because he was careless, but because his connecting flight into New York was delayed. He's a Microsoft vice president on his way to vacation in Hawaii. Although he can get there via an alternative routing through Seattle with only one hour’s delay, he'd be willing to pay $1,000 to avoid missing the flight. Of these two, who should miss the flight?

Prior to 1979, this question would have been decided on a first-come, first-served basis. John would have gotten to go, and Eric would have had to wait. Unlike the earlier example of the grandfather clock, this outcome would probably strike most observers as a good thing, at least insofar as John’s reasons for arriving on time seem more pressing than Eric’s.

The problem is that a first-come, first-served approach does not always yield intuitively pleasing results, and it may not have yielded the best result even in this case. Eric might just as easily have been the second passenger to arrive, for example, and John the 255th. Given the many random factors that can delay the arrival of connecting flights, there is no reason to presume that those who arrive first at the gate have the most pressing needs to claim their seats.

Because first-come, first-served does not allocate scarce seats in accordance with willingness to pay, it fails to maximize the size of the economic pie. It forces some people to wait who would be willing to pay a lot for the right to arrive on time, while permitting others to fly even though they wouldn't be willing to pay much to avoid waiting. For this reason, the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB, the federal agency that regulated the commercial airline industry until 1984) proposed that first-come, first-served be abandoned in favor of an alternative procedure based on willingness to pay.

The CAB’s specific proposal was to require carriers with oversold flights to offer cash payments, free tickets, or other compensation to induce volunteers to relinquish their seats. All passengers holding confirmed reservations had the right to remain on the flight under the proposal, which called for carriers to keep raising the compensation offer until enough volunteers stepped forward.

When a federal agency proposes a regulation of this sort, the public and other affected parties have an interval of time, usually sixty days, to comment on it. Shortly after the CAB announced its proposal, a passionate brief was filed by the Aviation Consumer Action Project (ACAP), a group founded by Ralph Nader in Washington, D.C. ACAP’s ostensible mission is to protect airline passengers from being exploited by air carriers. In its filing, it objected that if the CAB adopted its proposal, the burden of waiting for the next available flight would fall disproportionately on the poor. As in other arenas, ACAP feared, the rich would be empowered to buy their way out of the hassles of life, while the poor were forced to endure them.

ACAP’s objection initially struck a resonant chord in some listeners. On more careful reflection, however, most people seem to recognize it as silly. The problem is that rejecting the auction procedure meant sticking with the status quo, which often had even less desirable consequences for the poor. Suppose, for example, that John, the custodian on his way to visit his ailing mother, had been the 255th passenger to arrive, not the second. Under the CAB auction procedure, he'd have had the right to remain on the flight if he chose; or he could have relinquished his seat by accepting the compensation payment offered by the airline. But under first-come, first-served, he'd have been forced to miss his flight.

Under the auction proposal, the airline would need to recruit ten volunteers. Imagine that John had refused the airline's initial offer of $200, which elicited only three volunteers. When the airline upped its offer to $300, one more volunteer stepped forward, but John still remained behind. Finally, when the carrier offered $400, John and five others (Eric, the Microsoft vice president, not among them) agreed to wait, clearing the flight to leave. Now imagine that just as John was about to accept the cash payment of $400, ACAP officials arrived with a court injunction blocking the auction. Under the circumstances, John could have been forgiven for wondering how, exactly, ACAP was protecting his interests by denying him the option of volunteering. He didn't have to volunteer; it was just an option. He volunteered because, in his judgment, the $400 offer was greater than the value he placed on retaining his original seat. Otherwise, he'd have refused.

I've discussed this example with hundreds of people over the years and have not yet encountered anyone whos willing to say that the CAB should have withdrawn its proposal in response to the ACAP objection. The auction is efficient because it allocates seats on the basis of willingness to pay. Using willingness to pay means that poor people who have pressing needs will sometimes wait for the next flight, while rich people who don't have pressing needs will continue their journeys uninterrupted. But those who volunteer receive a payment that helps them meet other needs that they consider even more pressing. John will be late to visit his mother, but he will also be able to do other valuable things with the extra $400.

The decision of whether to volunteer might be a difficult one for some people. But the CAB decided that it would be better to allow people to make that choice for themselves, rather than follow ACAP’s advice to withhold the option. As before, the important question isn’t whether willingness to pay results in a perfect outcome, but whether an alternative exists that would be better.

To reject the ACAP objection is not to deny the difficulty of being poor. Nor does the example imply that willingness to pay must be the ultimate arbiter of every allocation problem. My focus here is on the distribution of ordinary goods and services: What kinds of programs should a public radio station broadcast? Who should get an antique clock? Who should wait for the next flight? And so on.

The CAB’s volunteer auction proposal was just one of several mechanisms the agency might have proposed for allocating seats on the basis of willingness to pay. For example, it could have proposed that carriers award seats to those passengers willing to bid the most to retain them. No less than the original proposal, this alternative would have allocated available seats on the basis of willingness to pay. But had the CAB proposed requiring passengers to bid for the right to remain on the flight, the proposal never would have been adopted.

The CAB was by no means alone among federal agencies in its sensitivity to such distributional concerns. Even in the face of lax campaign finance laws, low-income voters have considerable voice in the political process. They and those who speak for them will oppose any policy that gives short shrift to their interests. Whether they have the political power actually to block specific policies will of course depend on circumstance.

Apart from the ACAP objection, the CAB’s volunteer auction proposal attracted no significant opposition from the poor or their advocates. An important reason was that it granted low-income passengers a right with real economic value—namely the right to hold onto their seats unless they volunteered to relinquish them for compensation. Had the proposal not granted that basic right, it would surely have been rejected. The first-come, firstserved system would have persisted, leaving passengers rich and poor worse off than they are under the current volunteer auction system.

ACAP was incorrect to assert that the poor would always be the ones left waiting under the auction proposal. Poor passengers with pressing needs to arrive on time often refrain from volunteering, while more prosperous passengers in no particular hurry often step forward. Yet low-income passengers are surely more likely to volunteer than high-income passengers. But when they do step forward, it’s presumably because the cash compensation or free ticket is more valuable to them than the time they'd have saved by not volunteering.

Liberal Hostility to Cost-Benefit Analysis

As the preceding example clearly demonstrates, the monetary values people assign to the options they face provide extremely valuable guidance for how limited resources can best be allocated. Given whatever inequities may exist in the distribution of income at any moment, a public policy that allocates resources on any basis that ignores willingness to pay can always be transformed to produce better results for everyone.

Skepticism about markets in general, together with legitimate concerns about the high and rising inequality that characterizes market reward systems, have made many liberal commentators hostile to the use of unweighted willingness-to-pay measures in public policy decisions. And because the principles at work in the CAB example are completely general, this hostility has proven costly to the very same low-income constituents whose cause these commentators profess to champion. With careful attention to design details, virtually every public policy decision that does not reflect what people are willing to pay for the alternatives at issue can be transformed to produce a better outcome for everyone involved. Those who resist such changes would do well to imagine themselves in the role of Ralph Nader waving a court injunction that would block a low-income passenger from volunteering to accept compensation for agreeing to take a later flight.

Why Efficient Policies Are Often Impossible without Income Transfers

Conservatives, through their opposition to income transfers, have been an even bigger obstacle to the adoption of efficient public policies. That's because any democracy that does not transfer income from rich to poor almost always ends up attending to the interests of the poor in other, far more costly ways.

The earlier example involving the public radio format choice illustrates the basic idea. Recall that the switch from an all-music to an all-talk format would create $1,000 in benefits for a rich voter but cause $100 in harm to each of two poor voters. The poor voters have the power to vote down the switch. But because the switch would generate greater benefits than costs, it’s not in their interest to exercise that power. It would be better for everyone if the poor allowed the switch in return for an income transfer. Without the ability to make such transfers, the proposed switch fails, leaving both rich and poor voters worse off than if it had occurred.

Such instances are far from isolated. The energy crisis of 1979, for example, led President Jimmy Carter to propose a tax on gasoline of up to $0.50 per gallon. The idea was to use the price system to discourage gasoline consumption, thereby to reduce America’s dependence on foreign oil. An immediate objection to proposals of this sort is that they impose unacceptable hardship on poor families. Anticipating this objection, however, Carter simultaneously called for a reduction in the payroll tax, financed by revenue from the gasoline tax. Since the payroll tax is highly regressive, cutting it would mitigate the hardship imposed on low-income families by the gasoline tax.

Carter’s proposal was rejected in the end, partly because many of its critics mistakenly believed that the payroll tax rebate would undo the incentive to conserve. (What these critics failed to see was that even though the payroll tax rebate might enable people to purchase as much gasoline as before, the higher after-tax price of gasoline would give them a powerful incentive not to.) But another important reason for the Carter proposal’s failure was its call for income transfers to the poor. Ronald Reagan’s election was then still more than a year away, but congressional hostility to income redistribution was already on the rise.

The ultimate effect of failure to enact Carter’s proposal was to reduce the economic well-being of rich and poor alike. Instead of curbing gasoline consumption through the price system, as Carter had proposed, we extended price controls to protect the poor against higher prices. The results were costly to everyone: long lines at gas stations, valuable journeys postponed, and so on. Had Carter’s proposal been adopted, the higher gasoline prices would have been a small burden for rich citizens to bear in return for not having had to wait in line. Poor citizens would have avoided lines as well, and the payroll tax reduction would have cushioned the sting of higher gas prices.

Again and again, the pattern is the same. Because we can't or won't redistribute through the tax system, we're forced to attend to the interests of the poor in other, more costly ways. The poor can't afford a decent place to live? The most efficient remedy would be to increase the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), one of the few income-transfer programs that Ronald Reagan endorsed. But conservatives in Congress have grown increasingly hostile to the EITC in recent years. If we can’t transfer income directly, the alternative is usually a more costly one, such as rent controls.

Struggling farmers can’t make ends meet? The most efficient solution would be to transfer income to them directly. But with that option closed, we turn to other, far more costly measures, such as price supports for agricultural products. Poor people can't afford telephone service or pay their gas and electric bills? Again, the most efficient response would be income transfers, but instead we require “lifeline” utility rates that encourage inefficient use patterns and lead to higher rates for other customers.

Another consequence of our unwillingness to transfer income is the exemption of older vehicles from pollution regulations. Although cars fifteen years or older constitute only a small fraction of those driven in Los Angeles, these cars nonetheless account for most of the smog in the Los Angeles basin. They're exempt from pollution regulation because of legislators’ concern that failure to exempt them would impose unacceptable costs on the mostly poor motorists who drive them.

The problem of polluting older vehicles could be eliminated relatively cheaply by transferring enough income to the poor to enable them to purchase used cars of more recent vintage. That strategy would enable us to reduce emissions of hydrocarbons and nitrous oxide at a cost of roughly $15 per pound.’ Because it has exempted these vehicles, however, the California legislature has mandated the development of electric vehicles, for which the cost of removing these compounds is some $900 per pound. Here, too, our reluctance to transfer income has proven costly to rich and poor alike.

Economists have estimated that we could save billions of dollars in highway construction costs and wasteful traffic delays if we adopted a simple system of congestion pricing.‘ Using variants of existing technology (for instance, the E-ZPass system currently in use on many turnpikes and bridges in the Northeast), cars could be equipped with small electronic receivers that would register road-use fees that varied with traffic congestion. Thus a motorist who drove across Manhattan during the midday rush might incur $10.00 in extra tolls levied automatically through this receiver.

The clear obstacle to adopting this system is the specter of the burden it would impose on poor motorists forced to venture out into heavy traffic. Never mind that the revenue and other savings from the new system would be much more than enough to support income transfers sufficient to cushion the blow. Unless we're able to make the necessary transfers, congestion pricing will never be adopted. We will continue to incur highway construction and congestion costs that could easily have been avoided.

These are hardly isolated examples. Rather, they're part of a pervasive pattern in which our reluctance to transfer income to the poor leads us to address their concerns in other ways. Refusal to redistribute income through the tax system does not alter the fact that the interests of the poor will receive attention in a democratic society. It merely constrains us to attend to those interests in more costly ways.

Some Interesting Exceptions

Although failure to address distributional concerns often prevents implementation of efficient policies, there have been at least some instances in which policy makers have employed direct income transfers to pave the way for such policies. An instructive case in point was the New York State Public Service Commission's proposed imposition of a $0.10 charge for each directory assistance call placed from a private telephone. (At the time, such calls were available free of charge to telephone subscribers.) The commission’s motive for making this proposal was that free calling privileges forced telephone companies to employ hundreds of extra operators to look up numbers that most callers could have easily looked up for themselves.

The commission’s proposal drew the inevitable firestorm of protests. Sociology professors and others testified at commission hearings that essential community communications patterns would be seriously disrupted if callers lacked access to free directory assistance. As it became increasingly clear that the proposal was headed for failure, commission Chairman Alfred Kahn proposed the following simple amendment. The $0.10-per-call charge for directory assistance would still be added, but with the money saved by reassigning former directory assistance operators to other, more useful tasks, each subscriber would also receive a $0.30 credit on his or her monthly bill. Callers who made an average of fewer than three directory assistance calls per month would thus have lower total phone bills than before. With this amendment, the commission's proposal was enacted virtually without opposition.

The trivial sums at stake in this example demonstrate the power of distributional concerns in the public policy arena. Even if directory assistance calls had continued to be free, few families would have made more than ten of them in any month; and it’s hard to see how an additional expenditure of $1 per month could be viewed as a significant threat to the living standard of even the poorest families. The example also shows that opposition to efficient policies can be overcome if cash transfers or their functional equivalent are an available policy instrument.

The agricultural arena provides another example of the use of direct income transfers to facilitate efficient policy change. The background problem was the chronic economic pressure imposed on American family farmers by their inability to keep pace with the rapid productivity growth in corporate agriculture. By greatly expanding agricultural production, modern agribusiness had driven crop prices so low that many family farmers could not make ends meet. Concern for the plight of these farmers periodically prompted Congress to increase the levels at which it supports agricultural prices. Crop price supports induced farmers to spend billions of dollars on hired labor, machinery, seed, fertilizer, insecticides, and other inputs to produce crops that consumers didn’t want to buy at the supported prices. Government had to purchase the surplus and then watch much of it go to waste after extended and costly storage. If Congress's goal had been to design the most inefficient possible program for aiding family farmers, it could hardly have done better.

But the U.S. Department of Agriculture also administers at least one other program that attacks farm poverty in a much more efficient way. I refer to the department's Conservation Reserve Program (CRP), under which farmers receive cash payments for retiring some of their current acreage from cultivation. This program provides additional income to struggling family farmers without incurring the waste of producing crops that no one wants to buy.

Despite the fact that the CRP is far more efficient than price supports, it remains controversial. Indeed, it’s easy to see why critics might complain about a program that pays farmers for not producing something. The attraction of the program becomes clear, however, if the alternative is to pay them premium prices to produce crops that go to waste. In any event, the example illustrates that opposition to income transfers does not always prevent us from switching from an inefficient policy to a less wasteful one. In so doing, however, it raises the question of why we're not able to do this more often.

Other Barriers to the Adoption of Efficient Policies?

If we can negotiate efficient solutions in some cases, why do we avoid costbenefit logic in others? One difficulty might be that since virtually every issue up for public decision has at least some distributional implications, case-by-case compensation might simply be impractical. Perhaps it’s reasonable to hope for efficient solutions in only those cases that lend themselves to simple compensation arrangements—such as the volunteer auction solution for oversold flights or the monthly rebate palliative for the directory assistance charge. But many issues clearly do not lend themselves to such arrangements.

Yet efficient solutions are often elusive even in cases for which transfer remedies could be easily administered. If rent controls are inefficient, for example, why don't cities use vouchers to buy people out of their rent control leases? Tenants could relocate to smaller apartments at the market rate and be compensated by receiving the equivalent of a cash transfer in the form of a voucher.

By the same token, why don't we use auctions to determine the siting of prisons and other unattractive public facilities? Each community could submit a sealed bid indicating the minimum amount it would be willing to accept in return for agreeing to host the facility. The low bidder would get the facility and could be compensated with a cash payment equal, say, to the second-lowest bid.’ This payment could be financed by a tax levied on other communities in proportion to the bids they submitted, a measure that would give communities a strong incentive to keep their bids honest.

As the preceding discussion suggests, there seem to be at least two barriers to achieving efficient solutions through the use of cost-benefit analysis in the public domain. One is that many people—movement libertarians most prominently among them—are opposed to government redistribution as a matter of principle. The other is that, given the myriad of cases that must be decided on an almost daily basis, case-by-case distributional remedies may simply be impractical to administer.

As compelling as each of these two barriers may seem, neither can withstand careful scrutiny. Consider first the claim that income transfers are illegitimate as a matter of principle (“It’s your money . . 2”). The principle at stake here is the claim that since the individual has earned her income through fair, voluntary exchange in the marketplace, she is entitled to do with it as she pleases. Taken literally, however, this argument is unpersuasive, for it implies that the government ought to have no power to tax at all. As noted in chapter 1, such a government would be unable to field an army, and its citizens would sooner or later find themselves paying taxes to a foreign invader’s government.

The “It’s your money . .” principle fails for another important practical reason. Proponents of this principle presumably favor it because they believe that it would be better for people to have direct control over the largest possible share of the resources that they themselves have helped to produce. Yet this principle hardly seems worth fighting for if, as I have argued, its implementation actually reduces the amount of resources over which people have control. Again, democracies must choose between transferring resources to low-income people directly or responding to their interests in other, more costly ways.

What about the second barrier to efficiency, the fact that it may just not be possible to work out case-by-case compensating transfers for each of the myriad public policy decisions we confront every day? The answer is that we can employ cost-benefit analysis without taking this cumbersome step at all. My point is not that compensation is unnecessary, but rather that it need not occur on a case-by-case basis. Critics of cost-benefit analysis are correct that using willingness-to-pay measures virtually assures a mix of public programs that are slanted in favor of the preferences of high-income persons— for the simple reason that high-income persons are able to pay more.

But rather than abandon cost-benefit analysis, we have a better alternative. We can employ willingness-to-pay measures without apology, and use the welfare and tax systems to compensate low-income families for the resulting injury. Again, this compensation need not—indeed cannot—occur on a case-by-case basis. Rather, low-income persons could simply be granted concessions through the tax system reflecting their expected loss from the implementation of cost-benefit analysis based on willingness to pay. Such concessions would be in addition to the welfare and tax breaks required by other factors, which are our subject in the next chapter.
