Chapter 10. The Great Trade-Off?.

Socialismdoesntwork.com, A WEBSITE that bills itself as “the ultimate guide to why socialism causes more poverty, inequality, and injustice,” greets visitors with the following version of Aesop’s sixth-century BC fable of the goose that laid the golden eggs:

A man and his wife had the good fortune to possess a goose which laid a golden egg every day. Lucky though they were, they soon began to think they were not getting rich fast enough, and, imagining the bird must be made of gold inside, they decided to kill it. Then, they thought, they could obtain the whole store of precious metal at once; however, upon cutting the goose open, they found its innards to be like that of any other goose.’

This tale is a perennial favorite of movement libertarians, who invoke it to remind those who favor a more progressive tax system that such a system would impoverish everyone. Former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan, who describes himself as a libertarian, echoed this view when he wrote that “All taxes are a drag on economic growth. It’s only a matter of degree.”’ But it’s not just libertarians who believe taxes inhibit economic growth. Variations of that view, often called trickle-down theory, have been repeated so often by so many people across the political spectrum that it has acquired an air of settled truth.

It cannot literally be true, of course, that all taxes are a drag on economic growth. As noted earlier, unless we tax something, we can't organize and maintain a civil society and defend ourselves from foreign invaders, much less enjoy robust economic growth.

Without going into more detail about what, exactly, is being taxed, it's impossible even to discuss how taxes affect economic growth. In chapter 11, our focus will be on taxes levied on activities that cause harm to others. Such taxes, as welll see, not only don't reduce economic growth, they actually enhance it.

Income Taxes and the Incentive to Work

Libertarians and conservatives are surely right that, beyond some point, higher taxes on top incomes would curtail economic growth. If the tax rate were 100 percent, for example, and the government distributed the resulting revenue so that after-tax incomes were the same for everyone, then people would have no incentive to accept paid work at all. And in that case, there wouldn't be any revenue to distribute.

But that’s hardly an interesting claim, since it doesn't tell us anything about what would happen if we increased actual tax rates on top earners, which are nowhere close to 100 percent. For trickle-down theory to be of interest, then, it must assert something like this: At the tax rates actually observed in modern industrial countries, further rate hikes on top earners would cause economic growth to decline.

Is that claim correct? Its surface plausibility stems from the time-honored belief that people respond to incentives. Because higher taxes on top earners reduce the reward for effort and risk-taking, it seems reasonable that they'd induce people to work fewer hours and take fewer risks. Both responses would reduce economic growth.

As every economics textbook makes clear, however, a decline in after-tax wages also exerts a second, opposing effect. Because it makes people feel poorer, it provides an incentive to reverse their setback by working longer hours or taking more risks than before. Suppose, for example, that a high roller’s goal were to achieve a standard of living that could be maintained on $2,000 a day. If his current after-tax wage were $250 an hour, he'd need to work eight hours daily. But if a rate hike reduced his after-tax wage to $200 an hour, he'd need to work two additional hours, or else sell his Ferrari.

Others might react differently to a tax increase. Because a higher marginal tax rate reduces the opportunity cost of taking additional time off (in terms of forgone after-tax income), it might lead some to work fewer hours than before. Economic theory tells us nothing—absolutely nothing—about of which of these opposing effects might prevail.

If economic theory provides no justification for the trickle-down doctrine, what do the numbers say? Here as well, the doctrine finds little support. One test is suggested by the observation that if lower real wages induce people to work shorter hours, then the opposite should be true when real wages increase. Since 1900, average hourly wages in the United States have risen more than fivefold in inflation-adjusted terms. According to trickledown theory, then, Americans should be working significantly longer hours now. Yet the current American workweek is only about half what it was in Trickle-down theory also predicts shorter workweeks in countries with lower real after-tax pay rates. Yet here, too, the numbers tell a different story. For example, even though CEOs in Japan earn less than one-fifth as much as American CEOs and face substantially higher marginal tax rates, they actually work longer hours than their American counterparts.

Trickle-down theory’s emphasis on incentives has led many to predict that greater income inequality should be positively correlated with economic growth rates. The idea here is that greater income disparities should cause people to feel greater pressure to catch up with those ahead of them. As discussed in chapter 4, inequality does indeed affect spending patterns. Yet when researchers examine the data within individual countries over time, they find a negative correlation between growth rates and inequality. During the three decades immediately following World War II, for example, income inequality was low by historical standards, yet growth rates in most industrial countries were extremely high. In contrast, growth rates have been only about half as large during the years since 1973, a period in which income and wealth inequality have been steadily rising in most countries.

The correlation between growth rates and inequality is also negative in cross-national data. Using data from the World Bank and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development for a sample of sixty-five industrial nations, the economists Alberto Alesina and Dani Rodrik found that growth rates were negatively related to the share of national income going to the top 5 percent and top 20 percent of earners. Larger shares for poor and middle-income groups were associated with higher growth rates.’ Time after time, the pattern is the opposite of the one predicted by trickledown theory.

The Small Business Fallacy

Another variant of trickle-down theory was invoked by George W. Bush in 2001, and then again by John McCain in 2008, as the two men sought to defend reduced taxes on the nation’s top earners. This variant made no assertions about how tax cuts might affect the amount of effort people devote to paid work. Rather, the claim in both cases was that because many wealthy people own small businesses, which account for more than half of all new jobs created in the United States each year, the tax cuts would immediately stimulate additional job creation.

At first glance, the claim might seem plausible, and in fact it drew little criticism when they made it. On closer examination, however, it makes no economic sense at all. It’s inconsistent with everything we know about the economic logic that governs business hiring decisions.

The claim rests implicitly on the premise that if business owners could afford to hire additional workers, they would. But whether you can afford to do something tells you nothing about whether you ought to do it. The fact that you can afford a CD by a singer you dislike, for example, does not mean you should buy it. The fact that business owners can afford to hire additional workers is similarly uninformative. What matters is whether hiring them would increase their profits.

The basic hiring criterion, found in every introductory textbook, is straightforward: If what the additional workers would produce can be sold for at least enough to cover their salaries, they should be hired; otherwise not. If this criterion is met, hiring extra workers makes economic sense, no matter how poor a business owner might be. Conversely, if the criterion isn’t satisfied, hiring makes no sense, even if the owner is richer than Bill Gates. The after-tax personal incomes of business owners are simply irrelevant for hiring decisions.

To this objection, defenders of the tax-cut proposals sometimes responded that business owners need money up front to cover the hiring and training costs incurred before new workers can start boosting production. Tax cuts would help them cover those costs. It’s a fair point, but it doesn’t alter the basic hiring rule.

Owners who used their tax cuts to finance the initial costs of new hiring would be lending money to themselves in the hope of earning future returns. they'd be acting, in effect, as their own bankers. The test for whether such loans make sense is exactly the same as the test for external loans.

A loan from a bank passes the cost-benefit test if the firm’s eventual gain from hiring extra workers is enough to cover not only their salaries but also repayment of the loan plus interest. Internal loans must meet the same standard. They’re justified only if the firm’s gain from hiring extra workers is enough to cover their salaries and repayment of the loan, including the interest that owners sacrificed by not leaving their tax cuts in the bank. In hiring decisions, those implicit costs of internal loans have exactly the same weight as the explicit costs of external loans.

The argument that low tax rates for the owners of small businesses will stimulate them to hire more workers thus flies in the face of bedrock principles outlined in every introductory economics textbook. Small businesses have been justly praised as the primary engine of job creation in the American economy. But that doesn't negate the fact that personal income tax rates should have no bearing on their hiring decisions.

If an extra plumber would bring in an extra $2,000 a week in revenue but would be paid only $1,500 a week in salary, Joe's Plumbing Service would have every incentive to hire him. Yes, a tax cut would put more money into Joe’s pocket. But Joe would hire the extra plumber even without one. Conversely, if the extra plumber would bring in less than $1,500 a week, Joe wouldn't hire him no matter how big a tax cut he got.

In sum, neither economic theory nor available empirical evidence provides support for either variant of trickle-down theory. We have no persuasive reasons to believe that higher taxes on top earners would inhibit economic growth. And yet, as noted, this claim is often repeated and seldom questioned.

Why Lower Tax Rates on Top Earners Often Inhibit Growth

Still more troubling, there are cogent reasons for believing that lower tax rates on top earners may actually hamper the economy’s ability to take full advantage of available resources. For example, even though lower tax rates on top earners do not appear to encourage people to work significantly harder, they do appear to alter career choices in unproductive ways.

Prior to the financial crisis that began in 2008, a steadily growing proportion of the nation’s best and brightest students each year left school in hopes of becoming Wall Street money managers. In Princeton University’s class of 2007, for instance, 45 percent of all employed graduates had taken jobs in the financial services industry.‘ Accounts of these jobs portray them as unattractive along many dimensions.* They entail long hours, and many experience them as highly stressful. Others complain that they’re not intellectually challenging. But on one point all are agreed: these jobs pay extremely well. The best and the brightest have been seeking employment in the financial services industry in record numbers because people who are successful in that industry earn staggering amounts of money.

According to Institutional Investor’s Alpha magazine, for example, the hedge fund manager James Simons earned $1.7 billion in 2006, and two other managers earned more than $1 billion. The combined income of the top twenty-five hedge fund managers exceeded $14 billion that year. A year later, hedge fund manager John Paulson earned some $4 billion.

These managers also enjoy remarkably favorable tax treatment, for reasons that no one can seem to explain with a straight face. For example, even though “carried interest”—mainly their 20 percent commission on portfolio gains—has the look and feel of ordinary income, it’s taxed at the 15 percent capital gains rate rather than the 35 percent top rate for ordinary income. That provision alone saved Mr. Paulson some $800 million dollars in taxes in 2007.

Congress periodically considers proposals to tax carried interest as ordinary income. To no one’ surprise, financial industry lobbyists are always quick to insist that doing so would kill the geese that lay the golden eggs. The deals brokered by their clients often create enormous value, to be sure. Yet the proposed legislation would not block a single transaction worth doing. The same deal that currently augments a hedge fund manager's after-tax income by $1 million would augment it by $765,000 if carried interest were taxed as ordinary income. Can anyone credibly claim that this would make him abandon the deal?

Economic analysis suggests that higher taxes on hedge fund managers would actually boost production in other sectors of the economy by alleviating wasteful overcrowding in the market for aspiring portfolio managers. This market is a prime example of a winner-take-all market—essentially a tournament in which a handful of winners are selected from a much larger field of initial contestants. Such markets tend to attract too many contestants for two reasons.

One is an information bias. Before you can make an intelligent decision about whether to enter a tournament, you need at least some idea of what your odds of winning would be. Yet people's assessments of their relative skill levels are notoriously optimistic. More than 90 percent of workers, for example, consider themselves more productive than their average colleague. A similar proportion of drivers believe that they're more skillful than the average motorist. These biases don't seem to be eradicated by additional education. More than nine out of ten college professors believe themselves to be more productive than their average colleague.° Overconfidence is especially likely to distort career choice because, in addition to the motivational forces that support it, the biggest winners in many tournaments are so conspicuous. For example, NBA stars who earn eight-figure salaries appear on television several nights a week, whereas the thousands who failed to make the league attract little further attention. Similarly, hedge fund managers with ten-figure incomes are far more visible than the legions of contestants who never made the final cut. It’s a matter of simple logic that when people overestimate their chances of winning, too many forsake productive occupations in traditional markets to compete in winner-take-all markets.

The Tragedy of the Commons

Potential contestants in winner-take-all markets also confront a problem called the tragedy of the commons, an incentive structure that was first invoked to explain overfishing in ocean waters.’ The cod, once abundant in the North Atlantic, saw its population decline by more than 95 percent from overharvesting. The incentives that led to this decline were similar to those that produce excessive entry into many winner-take-all markets.

The tragedy of the commons provides a vivid illustration of Darwin's insight that individual and group interests often diverge sharply. A simple numerical example captures the essence of the conflict. Consider one hundred people, each trying to choose between two occupations: fishing for cod in an isolated fishery or working in a factory at an annual salary of $50,000 each. For simplicity, suppose that each views the two alternatives as equally attractive, apart from the matter of pay. So someone will choose fishing only if he can earn at least $50,000 a year in that occupation. Otherwise, he'll choose factory work.

Now imagine that cod in the fishery are initially so abundant that the first fisherman on the scene could earn $100,000 a year. Since that’s twice what someone would earn in the factory, others would quickly gravitate to fishing. But with only limited supplies of cod in the fishery, the average catch would steadily decline as the number of fishermen rose. Economic theory predicts that entry into the fishing industry would cease once the annual earnings from fishing had declined to $50,000, at which point people would be indifferent between fishing and factory work. Arbitrarily, let’s say that happens when there are forty fishermen (the qualitative point of the example is independent of that number).

With annual earnings of $50,000 apiece, those forty fishermen would earn a total of $2 million a year, and the remaining sixty who chose factory work would earn a total of $3 million. Collectively, then, our one hundred workers would earn $5 million a year. But that’s the very same total they'd have earned if all one hundred had chosen factory work! The fishery, potentially an extremely valuable resource, ended up being of no economic value at all. The problem was that individual incentives led too many people to become fishermen, in the process completely dissipating the potential economic surplus from fishing. (That it would have been possible to do better is clear by noting that if only one person had chosen fishing, the collective earnings of the one hundred would have been larger by $50,000, since the lone fisherman would have earned $100,000 while the other ninety-nine would have earned $50,000 as factory workers.)

The tragedy of the commons occurs because of a simple externality. Each potential fisherman cares only about the earnings from the fish he expects to catch. He has no reason to consider the fact that his entry would reduce the number of fish caught by existing fishermen. When the market reaches equilibrium, the last entrant’s $50,000 in earnings from fishing is just enough to compensate him for the $50,000 he gave up by not working in the factory. But because his entry also reduced the size of each existing fisherman's catch, the systemwide effect of his entry was actually negative. Individual incentives to enter fishing are thus far too large, and overfishing is the expected result.

The incentives confronting aspiring portfolio managers are exactly analogous. Just as there are only so many fish in the sea, at any given moment there are only so many deals to be struck. Beyond some point, increasing the number of money managers produces much less than proportional increases in total commissions on managed investments. One contestant’s good fortune in landing a position in a leading hedge fund is thus largely offset by her rival’s failure to land that same position. So here, too, private incentives result in wasteful overcrowding.”

The tendency to attract excessive contestants is by no means confined to the financial sector. It’s a feature found to some degree in almost every winner-take-all market. As a practical matter, moreover, almost all markets that generate society’s highest incomes are winner-take-all markets. There are typically a few highly leveraged positions atop each profession—Grammywinning recording artists, all-star shortstops, best-selling novelists, Fortune 500 CEOs, major network news anchors, Academy Award-winning actors, popular radio talk show hosts, leading plaintiffs attorneys, and so on. Because these positions are so lucrative, competition to occupy them is invariably intense. There are literally hundreds—in many cases even thousands—of highly capable, ambitious candidates for each opening.

Again, potential contestants in winner-take-all markets tend to overestimate their odds of success and to ignore the fact that their entry into one of these contests would make each existing contestant less likely to succeed. For both reasons, such labor markets tend to attract too many contestants.

In the fishing industry variant of the tragedy of the commons, total earnings rise when people shift from fishing to factory work. Similarly, if the least talented contestants were to forsake Wall Street or some other winnertake-all market for more traditional career paths, there would still be an ample number of talented competitors for each superstar position. So if half the people who are currently jockeying for positions in hedge funds and private equity firms were to leave the financial industry tomorrow, there would still be no shortage of extremely qualified candidates to fill those positions. The resulting gains from having more and better engineers, medical researchers, teachers, and family physicians would more than compensate for any lost value from having fewer contestants in winner-take-all markets. If after-tax incomes in winner-take-all markets were lower, fewer contestants would compete for positions in them. So the desired employment shifts could be encouraged simply by raising tax rates on top earners.

Referring to proposals to eliminate preferential tax treatment for hedge fund and private equity managers, a finance professor at Columbia Business School objected that “Private equity is a very important part of our economy, adding that higher taxes will discourage it.? Others have characterized the proposals as envy-driven class warfare.

Both observations, however, miss the essential point. No one denies that the talented people who guide capital to its most highly valued uses perform an important service for society. But the number of profitable deals to be had is not indefinitely expandable. Beyond some point, sending ever larger numbers of our most talented graduates out to prospect for them has a high opportunity cost, yet adds little economic value. Almost without exception, the graduates of Harvard, Princeton, and Yale who flocked to the financial services industry are extremely intelligent and industrious. Had they pursued other careers, some might have helped develop effective treatments for life-threatening diseases. Others might have helped develop more efficient solar panels. Instead, many of them helped market complex derivative securities that sent the nation into the deepest economic downturn since the Great Depression.

In short, making the after-tax rewards in winner-take-all labor markets a little less spectacular would raise the attractiveness of other career paths, ones in which extra talent would yield real gains. The resulting tax revenue would pay for many things that clearly need doing. In an economy in which winner-take-all markets play an increasingly prominent role, the conventional wisdom about the great trade-off between equity and efficiency is turned upside down. In today’s environment, higher taxes on top earners may actually promote both goals at once.

Even so, I believe that imposing higher income taxes on top earners would be a bad idea. As explained in chapter 5, a more steeply progressive tax on each household’s total consumption expenditure would be far more efficient than the current income tax. My reasons for opposing income taxes are very different from those offered by libertarians and other antitax crusaders, whose slogans have prevented us from having an intelligent conversation about how to reform our highly dysfunctional tax system.

That conversation needs to focus on fundamental questions that transcend the details of any particular tax. How should property rights be designed? What's the optimal balance between private and public goods, and what sorts of institutional arrangements might best promote that balance? How should we pay for public goods? What sorts of duties, if any, do we have toward society’s poorest members? What sorts of institutions would best promote environmental sustainability? And so on.

A Mindless Slogan Contest

An informed conversation about tax policy would benefit people on both sides of the political aisle. It would benefit people at every point along the income scale. At every turn, however, antitax and antigovernment slogans have stopped this conversation in its tracks. Almost without exception, these slogans are transparently at odds with existing theories and evidence about human behavior. Yet people continue to utter them with no apparent sense of embarrassment. Indeed, many of them are repeated deferentially even by highly sophisticated, ostensibly neutral commentators. Genuine reform will become possible only when these slogans provoke the widespread scorn they richly merit. So before pressing forward, it’s an opportune moment to review some of their deficiencies.

In a contest to determine the most mindless antitax slogan of all, “All taxation is theft” would get my vote. The ostensible point of this slogan is that meddlesome government officials shouldn't be allowed to confiscate economic resources that we have created by dint of our own talent and effort. But there isn’t much economic value to confiscate in countries that lack well-defined and enforced systems of property rights and the public infrastructure required for highly developed and specialized markets. None of that could exist unless government had the power to employ mandatory taxation. No informed person would seriously consider living in a society in which government lacked that power—even apart from the concern that such a society would quickly be conquered by an army supported by a neighboring country’s mandatory taxation.

A distant second in the mindless slogan contest would be some variant of “It's unjust to tax some people more heavily than others.” This slogan fails in multiple ways. All societies benefit from having roads, bridges, police and fire protection, national defense, and a host of other public goods and services. But no society can provide these things without raising the tax revenue to pay for them. As in the case of private goods, higher incomes generally spawn demands for more and better public goods. But any society that was constrained to collect no more in tax revenue from some citizens than others could provide public goods only in the quantities and qualities demanded by its poorest members. Again, no informed person would want to live in such a society.

Another problem with slogans decrying the injustice of progressive taxation is that they rest on a very strange theory of justice. In a libertarian’s ideal universe, people would be free to form societies with others of their own choosing and be bound by only those rules that commanded unanimous approval. In such a universe, if people wanted to form a society in which they occupied positions of high social rank, they'd have to persuade others to occupy the corresponding positions of low social rank. And if the implicit market for high-ranked positions within work groups in competitive labor markets is any guide, high-ranked positions in those voluntary societies would carry a steep price. Because such positions are highly valued, and can exist only if others bear the costs associated with the low-ranked positions required for high rank to exist, it's completely consistent with normal English usage to call progressive taxation fair. Yet antitax crusaders insist that people are entitled to occupy high-ranked positions free of charge, just because transaction costs make it impractical to form new voluntary societies at will. That position actually betrays a profound disdain for justice, as the term is conventionally understood.

Another influential antitax slogan has been “Success in the marketplace depends on talent and effort, not luck.” To the extent that it encourages people to strive harder for success, this slogan has actually done much good. But it has also done much harm. There are millions of hardworking, talented people who never achieve any significant measure of market success. The more we learn about how modern labor markets function, the clearer it becomes that chance events are often decisive. Even personal talent and the capacity for hard work are themselves heavily influenced by genetic and environmental factors, for which any reasonable person should be reluctant to claim moral credit. Slogans that downplay luck’s role in life reinforce the belief that people have a mora! right to keep 100 percent of their pretax earnings. And that belief has been unambiguously harmful.

Among all antitax slogans, however, none has caused more profound damage than the one that has been our focus in this chapter: “Taxing the rich kills the geese that lay the golden eggs.” Though unsupported by economic theory or empirical evidence, it’s less transparently absurd than “All taxation is theft.” But for that very reason, it’s far more widely believed and has therefore had far more pernicious influence on public policy. For example, it was the foundation for the George W. Bush tax cuts on the wealthiest households, which helped double the national debt during his presidency. Those same cuts, as we saw in chapter 4, also altered spending patterns in damaging ways.

Every American president elected during my lifetime campaigned on a pledge to eliminate wasteful spending in government. A few even made genuine progress toward that goal. Yet total government spending continued to increase throughout each and every one of those presidencies. We should of course continue to attack waste aggressively. But the bulk of the future spending increases we face are nondiscretionary, and our expectations must not be unrealistic.

With the baby boomers retiring, for example, we face a growing gap between Social Security payments and payroll tax receipts for the foreseeable future. Revenue shortfalls in the Medicare program, already large, will grow much faster than Social Security shortfalls because of inevitable cost increases in the medical sector. As experience has shown, these entitlement programs are politically sacrosanct.

There are other compelling candidates for additional public expenditure. Our transportation infrastructure, for example, has been neglected for decades. At some point, we will really have no choice but to repair our roads and bridges. We have no high-speed rail systems, even though many less developed countries are now building them." With soaring energy prices, a smart energy grid has become an increasingly attractive public investment." Many urban areas still lack even rudimentary public transportation systems. We still need to round up those loose nukes in the former Soviet Union. We should reverse earlier funding cuts for scientific research, which has always been an important source of competitive advantage. The list goes on.

We may be able to rationalize our major entitlement programs at the margins, and extract some savings here and there from other cutbacks. But only a fool could pretend that we will be able to do what needs to be done in the years ahead in the absence of substantial additional revenue. Although I believe it would be a bad idea to raise top marginal income tax rates, we must be prepared to consider other ways of taxing society’s most prosperous members. As Willie Sutton said when asked why he robbed banks, that’s where the money is. If we can't tax the rich, there's no hope of raising the revenue we'll need. But the good news, as we'll see, is that certain taxes can be levied on top earners without harming their interests in any way.
