Chapter 8. “It’s Your Money…”.

In The Second Treatise of Civil Government, the seventeenth-century British philosopher John Locke wrote that “every man has a property in his own person. This nobody has any right to but himself. The labour of his body, and the work of his hands, we may say, are properly his.”

These words made Locke an intellectual hero of movement libertarians, who continue to view all taxation as theft. Although more serious libertarians grudgingly concede the need for at least some taxation, there is no denying that Locke's words have had enormous rhetorical force far beyond libertarian circles. If you make something more valuable by applying your own talent and effort to it, the added value feels like it’s yours. By what right might government lay claim to it?

The notion that people have a natural right to the fruits of their own labor has gained considerable strength in the decades since Ronald Reagan began advocating it forcefully in his speeches. Former House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Bill Archer (R, TX) echoed Reagan's language in defense of a proposal to reduce taxes on high-income households in the late 1980s: “It’s a matter of principle,” he wrote, “to return excess tax money in Washington to the families and workers who sent it here.” And as George W. Bush memorably put it,when speaking in defense of his proposed $1.3 trillion in income tax cuts targeted largely to America's wealthiest families, “It’s your money. You paid for it” If an American politician today proposes a tax on anything, his opponents will immediately lambaste him for believing that “the bureaucrats in Washington know how to spend your money more wisely than you do.”

The Myth of Ownership

On closer examination, the intuition that people have a moral right to keep all of their pretax income quickly crumbles. The high incomes of people in modern industrial democracies are not a consequence of their efforts alone. They're in large measure the result of vast current and past public investments in infrastructure, education, and institutions for defining and enforcing private property rights. It's easy to lose sight of the central role such investments continue to play in our prosperity.

Decades ago I had an opportunity to observe firsthand what life was like in an environment that had not benefited from investments of this sort. Fresh out of college, I served for two years as a Peace Corps volunteer math and science teacher in a small village in Nepal, which was then, and remains, one of the poorest countries on the planet.

As was the custom among Peace Corps volunteers there, I hired a cook. His name was Birkhaman Rai. he'd come to Nepal a few years earlier from a remote Himalayan village in neighboring Bhutan, and although he'd never spent a day in school, he was by far the most resourceful and multitalented person I’ve ever met.

In addition to being a skilled cook and a shrewd negotiator in the marketplace, he could butcher a goat and repair thatched roofs. He could plaster walls and fix broken alarm clocks. He was an able tinsmith and a remarkably skilled carpenter. When a pair of my favorite shoes wore out, he repaired them as well as any professional cobbler might have. He quickly became the village authority on home remedies.

Because he hadn't learned to read and write, I never managed to keep in touch with him during the years after I left. But because Nepal is still almost as bereft of infrastructure as when I lived there, the several hundred dollars a year I was able to pay Birkhaman from my Peace Corps living allowance was in all likelihood the high-water mark in his lifetime income stream.

If he'd been born in the United States, there's a good possibility he'd have long since become a wealthy man. At the very least, someone with his skills and determination would have earned hundreds of times as much as he ever managed to earn in Nepal.

Each year as the April 15 tax filing deadline draws near, wealthy libertarians mount the stump in high dudgeon to denounce the government for seizing money that is rightfully theirs. They might do well to reflect briefly on the fact that no matter how talented and industrious they are, they wouldn't have had any significant wealth to seize in the first place if they'd grown up in a country like Nepal or Somalia. The infrastructure that made their wealth possible was paid for by taxes. Much of that wealth is thus an unearned return on investments made by others.

The philosophers Liam Murphy and Thomas Nagel have examined the “myth of ownership” encouraged by “It’s your money . . ”» rhetoric, arguing that it deflects us from considering important questions we should be asking about our entire system of laws and social institutions.’ Thus, they write,

The question, How much of “our money” may the government take in taxes? is logically incoherent, because the legal system, including the tax system, determines what “our money” is. The real moral issue is how the legal system that governs property rights should be designed, and with what goals. What kinds of markets will best promote investment and productivity? Which goods, at what level, should be provided by collective public decision and which goods by private individual choice?

Should all citizens be guaranteed a minimum level of economic protection? To what extent should equal opportunity be publicly supported?

Are large social and economic inequalities morally objectionable, and if they are, what may legitimately be done to discourage them?’

It’s of course impossible to discuss such questions without talking about who should be paying what kinds of taxes. Yet public conversations among elected officials about taxes of any kind are typically stopped in their tracks by “It’s your money . ..” incantations from the right. Our inability to pursue these conversations has made us all poorer. Social Engineering!

For more than a century there was intense debate about whether people would be more likely to thrive under a centrally planned and managed economy or under one that relegated most economic decisions to decentralized private markets. That debate is over. Whatever the shortcomings of a decentralized market system might be, the experience of the collective economies of the former Soviet Union has persuaded most neutral observers that some variant of a market system must figure prominently in any successful economic program.

In practice, of course, even the least regulated market economy has a large public sector. In addition to maintaining the legal framework under which private firms and consumers operate, it produces public goods like roads, education, police and fire protection, and national defense. The tax system must pay for those goods.

A tax on any activity not only generates revenue, it also discourages the activity. Taxes on useful activities, such as those on savings or job creation, make the economic pie smaller. In contrast, taxes on activities that harm others, such as those on pollution or congestion, make the economic pie larger. In chapter 11, ’'ll consider in detail how we might shift away from taxes on useful activities toward those on activities that cause harm to others.

Because shifting taxes in that way would make the economic pie larger, making it possible for everyone to have a larger slice than before, this should be a relatively uncontroversial step. Yet taking it would inevitably provoke howls of protest from movement libertarians. “Social engineering!” they'd scream in unison, by which they'd mean attempts to “control our behavior, steer our choices, and change the way we live our lives.” Gasoline taxes aimed at discouraging dependence on foreign oil, for example, invariably elicit this accusation.

But as noted in chapter 1, it's an empty complaint, because virtually every law and regulation constitutes social engineering. Laws against homicide and theft control our behavior, steer our choices, and change the way we live our lives, so they’re social engineering, as are noise ordinances, speed limits, even stop signs and traffic lights. The only alternative to social engineering is complete anarchy. Taxes are a far cheaper and less coercive way to curtail harmful behavior than are laws or prescriptive regulations. That's because taxes concentrate harm reduction in the hands of those who can alter their behavior most easily, a point about which I'll say more in chapter 11.

Here we'll take up a much more controversial dimension of tax policy— namely its effects, both intended and unintended, on the distribution of after-tax incomes. What constitutes a just distribution of income, and what responsibility, if any, does the government have to promote one? Few questions have received more attention from philosophers, economists, legal scholars, and others.’ Those questions, however, are well beyond the scope of our discussion here. Rather, my focus will be on the claim, often pressed by libertarians and political conservatives, that deliberate income redistribution is illegitimate under any circumstances. This claim, it turns out, is difficult to defend no matter what beliefs one might hold about the broader questions just mentioned.

As we saw in the preceding chapter, for example, refusing to transfer income from rich to poor often causes democracies to address the interests of low-income voters in other, less efficient, ways, to the detriment of rich and poor alike. It’s one thing to claim a right to keep 100 percent of your pretax income. Exercising that right, however, makes little sense in cases in which doing so makes you and everyone else poorer. But there are other, more telling, problems with the libertarian objection to redistributive taxation.

Efficient Provision of Public Goods

An important practical worry is that reluctance to transfer income will often make it impossible to supply public goods that high-income citizens value and would be happy to pay for. As in the case of private goods, people's willingness to pay for public goods generally increases with their income. The wealthy tend to assign greater value to public goods than the poor do, not because the wealthy have different tastes, but because they have more money.

A society consisting only of the wealthy would choose to provide more and better public goods than one consisting only of the poor. But when people of all income levels live together in a single society, the very nature of public goods requires that their quantity and quality be the same for everyone. Society must decide how much people of different income levels should be taxed to pay for those public goods. Some simple numerical examples help illustrate why progressive taxation is often a practical step that benefits people all along the income scale.

Suppose two citizens, Rand and Paul, own adjacent summer cottages on a lake. Because of a recent invasion of zebra mussels, each must add chlorine to his water system each week to prevent it from becoming clogged by the tiny mollusks. A manufacturer has introduced a new filtration device that eliminates the nuisance of weekly chlorination. The cost of the device, which has the capacity to serve both houses, is $1,000. Both owners feel equally strongly about having the filter. But Rand, who earns twice as much as Paul, is willing to pay up to $900 to have it, whereas its value to Paul is only $300.

Neither will purchase the filter individually, because its separate value to each is below its selling price. But because the two together value it at $1,200, it would be worthwhile for them to share its use. If they were to do so, their total economic surplus (their combined benefit from the filter, minus its cost) would be $200. And when the economic pie grows larger, it must always be possible for each party to enjoy a larger slice than before.

Since it’s efficient for Rand and Paul to share the filter, we might expect them to quickly reach agreement to purchase it. Unfortunately, however, the joint purchase and sharing of facilities is often easier proposed than accomplished. As Ronald Coase clearly recognized, people typically must incur costs merely to discuss joint purchases. With only two people involved, these costs might not be prohibitive. But if hundreds or thousands were involved, communication costs could easily make the transaction impossible.

With large numbers of people, the so-called free-rider problem also emerges. If a project will either succeed or fail independently of any one persons contribution to it, everyone has an incentive to hold back—or “free ride”—in the hope that others will contribute. Finally, even when only few people are involved, reaching agreement on what constitutes a fair sharing of the total expense may be difficult. For example, Rand and Paul might be reluctant to disclose the true amounts they'd be willing to pay for the filter for the same reason you might be reluctant to tell a merchant the most you'd be willing to pay for an Oriental rug.

Such practical concerns may lead us to empower government to buy public goods on our behalf. But even that step does not eliminate the need to reach political agreement on how to pay for them.

Suppose Rand and Paul could ask the government to help broker their water-filter purchase. And suppose the government's tax policy must follow a “nondiscrimination” rule that prohibits charging any citizen more than his or her neighbor for a public good.

If public goods can be provided only if a majority of citizens approve of them, a government bound by these rules would not be able to provide the filter. Because it would have to rely on a head tax (one levied in equal amounts on every citizen), it would need to raise $500 from Rand and $500 from Paul to cover the filter’s price. But since it’s worth only $300 to Paul, he'd vote against the project, thus denying it a majority. So a democratic government could not provide the filter if it had to rely on a head tax.

The point illustrated by this example applies whenever the valuation of a public good differs significantly across taxpayers, as it almost always will whenever people earn significantly different incomes. An equal-tax rule under these circumstances would make it impossible to provide many worthwhile public goods.

Now suppose that government can impose a progressive tax on income. If Rand, who earns twice as much as Paul, were a libertarian, he'd complain bitterly about the injustice of his being taxed so much more heavily than Paul. On a moment's reflection, however, he'd realize that this objection would kill the project. He'd be better off to let the government levy a tax of $750 on him and one of $250 on Paul. Under this levy, Rand gets a filter whose use is worth $900 to him for a payment of only $750. So by abandoning his opposition to progressive taxation, he gets to enjoy an additional economic surplus of $150. Paul, for his part, gets a filter worth $300 to him for a payment of only $250, so he enjoys an additional economic surplus of $50.

The absurdity of demanding that every citizen contribute an equal absolute amount, or even an equal proportion of his income, to pay for collectively consumed goods is cast into even sharper relief by imagining what would happen if married couples were subject to similar constraints. Suppose, for example, that Julie earns $2 million a year while her husband Bruce earns only $20,000. Given her income, Julie as an individual would want to spend much more than Bruce on housing, travel, entertainment, and the many other items they consume jointly. But if each member of the couple were forced to contribute an equal amount toward the purchase of such items, they'd be constrained to live in a small house; send their children to substandard schools; skimp on vacations, entertainment, and dining out; and so on. It’s therefore easy to see why Julie might find it attractive to pay considerably more than 50 percent for things that she and Bruce consume jointly.

The justifications for progressive income taxation implicit in the examples just discussed were rooted in strictly practical concerns. Progressive taxation was an instrument that helped both rich and poor achieve their goals more fully. It had nothing to do with moral concerns about fairness or equity. The latter concerns have of course always been at the heart of liberals’ case for progressive taxation. And it has been these concerns that many libertarians and conservatives have rejected as illegitimate. But the distinction between moral concerns and strictly pragmatic ones is often less clear than many believe.

A Libertarian Rationale for Progressive Taxation

Again it's Ronald Coase whose insights help uncover a productive new way of thinking about an old problem. Rank in any hierarchy is, like the externalities that were the focus of his work, a reciprocal phenomenon. That is, no person can occupy a position of high rank in any group unless others in that same group occupy positions of low rank. The pursuit of high-ranked positions in any group thus gives rise to a positional externality. If those who desire such positions are to achieve what they wish, others must bear the cost of occupying the low-ranked positions without which high rank wouldn't be possible. In these simple observations, as we'll see, lie the seeds of a libertarian theory of progressive taxation.

To sketch this theory in broad outline, let’s begin with a thought experiment that is stacked heavily in favor of libertarian sensibilities. Imagine that you and 999 others have just emerged from an ark after an epic flood that has destroyed all existing social arrangements. Your task is to form a new society with others of your own choosing. If others want to structure society in ways that offend you, you needn't join them. Nor, however, can you force others to join you in a society they don't favor. In short, membership in the new societies that form under this thought experiment is strictly by mutual consent.

At the outset, every society that forms is entitled to a proportional share of the land and other property that survived the flood. For example, if you and 99 others agreed to form a separate society, you'd constitute 10 percent of the world’s population, so you'd start out with 10 percent of all existing land and other property. Not all property in each society’s initial allocation is equally desirable. Part of the task of forming a society is thus to agree on rules that determine how property will be allocated among the members of that society.

Talent and temperament are assumed to be perfectly observable. Once you and others agree to form a society, you're free to earn as much as your efforts and abilities permit, but you must also comply with whatever tax laws and other regulations your society agrees to adopt.

As a moment's reflection makes clear, important outcomes hinge on the identities of those who agree to join you in forming a society. If most of them were highly productive, for example, your society would be able to purchase more and better public goods than would be possible in a society consisting only of unproductive people. But there would also be a downside if most of your fellow citizens were far more productive than you.

Suppose, for example, that you and most others would enjoy having a house with a view. Not all home sites have views, unfortunately, and in the likely event that your society adopts something like a market mechanism for allocating land and other property, it’s all but certain that the least productive members of society won't be able to afford a house with a view.

Perhaps having a view is of no concern. But you probably do care about being able to send your children to good schools, ones that will prepare them to compete effectively for admission to a good university or to be considered favorably for a desirable job. But again, a good school is an inherently relative concept. It’s one that compares favorably with other schools in the same environment.

In virtually every country, the best schools tend to serve the most expensive neighborhoods. In some places, that’s because property taxes provide a large component of school budgets. But even when expenditure per pupil is the same in every school, the best schools tend to be those in the most expensive neighborhoods. One reason is that a major component of a school’s quality is the quality of its students, and the children of the most successful parents enjoy significant learning advantages both before and after they begin school. The schools that serve these students would thus offer better learning environments, even if their budgets were the same as in other schools.

If your children’s education matters to you, then, you'll need to bid for a house in a good school district in whatever society you elect to join. If we again assume that private markets will be the main allocation mechanism adopted by most societies, your prospects of being able to send your children to a relatively good school would be much diminished if you joined a society in which most others were significantly more productive than you.

The upshot is that your choice of which society to join must take into account where you'd rank on the productivity scale vis-a-vis your fellow citizens. The best outcome, of course, would be to be one of the most productive members of a highly productive society, for that way you'd enjoy the advantages of both absolute and relative wealth. But for most people, that’s simply not an option. As the average productivity of the others in any society rises, your rank within that society declines. Conversely, as the average productivity of the others you join declines, your rank in that society rises.

Any advantages that might accrue from living in a society with higher average productivity will thus be offset in part by the fact that in such a society, your rank on the income scale will be lower. If all else were equal, of course, most people would prefer to occupy positions of high social rank than positions of low social rank. And if the advantages of high social rank could be had for free, everyone would choose it. But it’s mathematically impossible for everyone in every society to enjoy a position of high rank. So the question becomes, why would anyone agree to join a group in which he'd be a low-ranked member?

If people were determined to avoid positions of low social rank, they could form separate societies with people who were exactly as productive as themselves. The most able people could form one society of equals, the nextmost-able a second society of equals, and so on. No one would have low social rank in these societies, but this solution would also pass up some obvious possibilities for mutually beneficial exchange. Who, for example, would sweep the streets in the society consisting of only the most talented people? Whod perform brain surgery in the society consisting of only the least talented?

Even apart from such practical difficulties, pure stratification would eliminate another potentially important gain from exchange, one that arises whenever some people care more than others about rank. If the value of high rank for some people exceeds the corresponding cost of low rank for others, groups of mixed ability can form in which everyone fares better than each would as a member of a separate society of equals.

Suppose, for example, that if Rand were permitted to keep the full fruits of his own labor, he could produce and earn $10,000 a week, and that the corresponding figure for Paul would be only $5,000. And suppose that each would be willing to pay up to 30 percent of his income to occupy a position of high rank in society, because that way he'd be able to purchase a house with a view, or one that would enable him to send his children to good schools. Imagine, too, that each would be willing to accept compensation of as little as 30 percent of his income for agreeing to occupy a position of low rank. Let’s suppose, in other words, that Rand would be just as happy earning $7,000 a week in a society in which he enjoyed high rank as he'd be in a society of equals in which he earned $10,000, or as he'd be if he earned $13,000 in a society in which he was the least productive member. He wouldn't be able to afford a house with a view in the latter society, but there would be other attractive things he could buy with his extra money. Paul, for his part, would be just as happy earning $6,500 a week in a society in which he occupied a position of low rank as he'd be in a society in which he and all others earned $5,000.

Under these circumstances, both Rand and Paul can do better by working together than by joining others whose abilities exactly match their own. If the two men join together, their total weekly earnings will be $15,000 (the sum of what they produce separately). If Rand claimed $8,000 of that total and Paul claimed the remaining $7,000, then Rand would enjoy an economic surplus of $1,000 a week and Paul would enjoy a surplus of $500 a week relative to the alternative of joining others of like ability and being paid the respective values of what they produced.

What if Rand didn’t care about occupying a position of high social rank? His best bet would then be to join a group consisting of others more productive than himself who do care about rank. His presence as a low-ranked member of that group would be an asset that makes the value of high rank in the group available to others, for which he'd be compensated accordingly.

My claim, then, is that in an environment constructed for the specific purpose of shielding libertarian sensibilities from any possibility of coercion, the voluntary societies that formed would all feature progressive income taxation. The degree of progressivity that would emerge in this thought experiment would depend on how much some were willing to pay for positions of high social rank and on how much others were willing to accept for agreeing to occupy positions of low rank. Those are empirical questions, about which I'll have more to say in a moment. For now, note that no libertarian would have grounds for complaint about living under such a tax system. The key point is that if progressive taxation were not permitted, the result would be societies completely stratified by ability, which would be a less attractive arrangement for every person.

The rationale for progressive taxation suggested by this thought experiment doesn't explicitly invoke concerns about fairness or justice. Rather, each society’s tax structure emerged as a straightforward consequence of self-serving exchange among free and independent individuals.

But if we can agree that high-ranked positions in a social hierarchy are valuable, the interpretation suggested by the thought experiment is completely compatible with conventional discourse about fairness and justice. Again, the only way some can occupy positions of high social rank is for others to occupy positions of low social rank. In any society of mixed ability that lacked progressive taxation, then, people of high rank would be enjoying a valuable asset completely free of charge. That asset’s value wouldn't exist except for the fact that others bore the costs associated with the lowranked positions that made high rank possible. As the terms fairness and justice are conventionally understood, there is nothing mysterious about saying that it would be unfair or unjust for some to profit free of charge from costs borne by others without compensation.

The Implicit Market for High Rank in the Labor Market

Although the thought experiment may seem fanciful, a close approximation of it actually plays out in the competitive labor markets we see all around us. In the United States and most other democracies, no one can be forced to work for a firm against his wishes. We can also safely assume that if all other relevant factors were equal, most people would prefer to occupy a high-ranked position vis-a-vis their co-workers than a low-ranked position. These two assumptions imply a clear prediction—namely that it would be impossible for work groups of mixed ability to form and remain stable unless pay were transferred from the most productive members in each group to the least productive. (The underlying argument is exactly analogous to the one that drives the thought experiment just discussed.)

To test this prediction, we can compare pay patterns within work groups to the patterns predicted by conventional labor market theories, which assume that rank doesn’t matter. According to those theories, workers are paid the market value of what they produce. In actual markets, pay does rise with productivity, but not by much. The most productive carpenter in a framing crew, for example, might produce twice as much as his least productive colleague, but he is rarely paid even 30 percent more.

The observed distribution of wages within any work group is thus typically much more compressed than the corresponding distribution of individual productivity. To see this pattern first-hand, consider groups of coworkers who perform similar tasks in your own organization. (If you're a junior associate in a large law firm, for example, consider the other junior associates in your group.) In one case, suppose your two most productive colleagues leave the job; in the other, suppose the three least productive leave. Which group’s departure would cause a greater loss of value? Most people answer without hesitation that losing the top two would hurt more.

If so, conventional labor market theory holds that their combined salaries should be higher than the combined salaries of the bottom three. Yet the typical pattern is the reverse: any three workers in a group performing similar tasks earn substantially more than any other two. The typical pattern, in short, is that the more productive members of a group performing similar tasks are paid less than the value of what they produce, while the least productive workers are paid more than the value of what they produce.

My claim is that this pattern reflects the workings of an implicit market for high-ranked positions within work groups. If that claim is correct, it suggests a simple answer to the otherwise vexing question of why the seemingly underpaid most productive members in each work group aren't quickly bid away by rival employers. Although their current pay falls short of what conventional models predict, they're receiving something else they greatly value. By their willingness to remain, they’re implicitly saying that the high rank they enjoy is more than enough to offset the corresponding sacrifice in pay. By the same token, although their less productive co-workers may find it onerous to be near the bottom of the ladder, their decision to remain on board suggests that they’re adequately compensated for that fact by their premium wages.

In effect, then, private labor markets serve up an implicit progressive tax in the schemes that govern the distribution of pay within every work group. Because labor contracts are voluntary under United States law, it would be bizarre for a libertarian to object that these transfers violate anyone's rights.

How Much Is High Rank Worth?

How big are the implicit income transfers from high-ranked workers to their low-ranked colleagues? Or, to put this question another way, by how much does the most productive worker’s value to her employer exceed the amount she is paid? Because production is often a complex team activity, individual differences in productivity tend to be exceedingly difficult to measure. Yet circumstances sometimes permit us to place reasonable bounds on differences in individual contributions to an employer’s bottom line.

An example from my own university illustrates how we might proceed in a specific case. The two main missions of my colleagues on the faculty are to teach and conduct research. Contributions in each domain are complex and multidimensional. Even so, it’s possible to place at least crude lower bounds on the extent to which the overall values of individual contributions differ.

For example, although total research productivity is exceptionally difhcult to measure, one dimension of it is fairly easily quantified in monetary terms—namely the grants and other financial support that researchers are able to generate from sources outside the university. When a faculty member receives a research grant from a government agency or private foundation, the funds are typically allocated into two categories, direct costs and indirect costs. Money in the direct cost portion of the budget is meant to cover laboratory equipment, supplies, and other direct expenses incurred while carrying out the funded research. In contrast, the indirect cost portion of the grant budget is for helping to defray the costs of maintaining the university’s infrastructure—libraries, utilities, IT networks, administrative and other support staff, snow removal, and so on.

The important point, for present purposes, is that the expenses covered by the indirect cost portion of grant budgets are largely fixed. The fact that a professor receives a grant thus does not cause any increase in the university president's salary, library expenses, snow removal costs, or other overhead expenses. It follows, then, that if a newly hired professor brought with her a stream of grants with an average indirect cost contribution of $1 million per year, the university’s annual budget would improve by exactly that amount. That is, the university’s budget surplus would be $1 million a year larger than if the professor had remained at a rival university.

Because the labor market for high-quality faculty is extremely competitive, universities compete vigorously with one another to attract any faculty member who consistently generates unusually large contributions to indirect costs. Under conventional theories of competitive labor markets, which make no allowance for concerns about rank, such contributions would be reflected dollar-for-dollar in salaries. Those models predict that a faculty member who reliably brought in $1 million in annual indirect cost recovery would be paid $1 million more than an otherwise identical faculty member who brought in no indirect cost money. (For example, if a university that was trying to recruit the star grant-getter offered a salary premium smaller than $1 million, her current university's clear incentive would be to match the offer.)

When we go to the numbers, however, we see that salaries are nowhere near that responsive to this particular measure of productivity. In one Cornell University science department, for example, each long-run average increase of $1 in overhead cost recovery increased the responsible faculty member's salary by only $0.09.'

If the professors whose grants generated the biggest indirect cost contributions were less productive than their colleagues in other ways, the apparent insensitivity of their salaries to indirect cost contributions might be an illusion. That is, the biggest grant-getters might not receive their apparent due in salary because they're inferior teachers, or because they make less valuable contributions to the university’s mission in other ways. That’s a plausible concern, since teaching and research obviously make competing claims on a professor's limited time and energy.

Evidence suggests, however, that the biggest grant recipients are also more productive than their colleagues along other important dimensions. Grants tend to be awarded in part on the basis of a researcher’s academic reputation, for example, so those who bring in the most grant money are also contributing more than others to the university’s prestige, independently of the grants they receive. Evidence also suggests that more productive researchers tend to be slightly more effective teachers, on average.° The upshot is that individual differences in indirect cost recovery almost certainly understate the corresponding differences in overall productivity. Yet only a tiny fraction of indirect cost recovery differences are reflected in salaries.

This pattern is widespread. In every occupation for which data facilitate the relevant comparisons, the most productive workers in any unit are paid substantially less than the value they contribute, while the least productive workers are paid substantially more.° Other factors might of course contribute to the observed discrepancies. But even when such factors can be ruled out, substantial wage compression remains.’ That's precisely the pattern wed predict if people assign considerable value to high-ranked positions within work groups.

Because such positions cannot exist unless others agree to occupy the corresponding low-ranked positions, high rank commands a steep implicit price. In effect, each employer administers an implicit income redistribution scheme that taxes the most productive workers in each group and transfers additional pay to the least productive.

Those who especially value high rank are more likely to accept the implicit wage penalty that comes with being one of the most productive workers in a group with relatively low average productivity. In contrast, those who care least about high rank will tend to gravitate to low-ranked positions in groups of high average productivity, for which they receive an implicit wage premium. And the best option available to those with intermediate concerns about rank is a middle-ranked position in a group of average productivity, where their pay roughly matches the value of what they produce.

There is thus, in effect, an implicit market for high local rank that functions much like the analogous implicit markets for job characteristics like safety and autonomy. Those who especially value safety tend to gravitate to the safest jobs and suffer a wage penalty sufficient to cover the cost of additional safety measures. Those who especially value autonomy tend to gravitate to the jobs that offer the most freedom, and they too experience a concomitant wage penalty. And those who especially value high rank tend to choose jobs that offer it, willingly accepting the often-substantial wage penalties.

Like the implicit markets for other desirable job characteristics, the implicit market for high-ranked positions operates largely beyond the conscious awareness of firms and workers. The facilitating taxes and transfers occur without any of the affected parties having to engage in difficult or costly negotiations. Firms simply post their pay schedules and people then decide which jobs best suit them. The implicit market for high-ranked positions in work groups is one of the relatively rare examples in which transaction costs do not prevent people from working out efficient solutions to externalities on their own.

Social Comparisons outside the workplace

Groups of co-workers aren't the only social hierarchy that matters. People also care about how their incomes compare with those of others outside the workplace. One study, for example, found that a married woman whose sister did not work outside the home was from 16 to 25 percent more likely to seek employment if her sister’s husband earned more than her own husband.* Neighbors’ incomes matter.’ Friends’ incomes matter. Indeed, because the spending of others shapes the frame of reference that governs consumption standards generally, there’s almost no one in the community whose income is irrelevant.

The implicit market for high-ranked positions in work groups does nothing to help deal with positional externalities that arise outside the workplace. On the contrary, that market actually exacerbates the strength of such externalities facing those who occupy high-ranked positions in work groups, who have had to sacrifice a significant portion of what they otherwise could have earned.

And unfortunately for everyone, it’s considerably more difficult to negotiate solutions to positional externalities with strangers in the community than it is to resolve them within the confines of private work groups. Again, there are virtually no complex agreements that need to be negotiated in order to compensate for positional externalities within work groups. Firms merely need post wage schedules that are relatively compressed with respect to productivity differences, and allow workers to choose the package that best suits them. In contrast, the task of negotiating similar compensation agreements with others outside the workplace would be enormously costly and difficult.

Ronald Coase is the free-market conservative’s reigning authority on all questions regarding activities that cause harm to others. His central insight was not that government has no role to play in helping curb the damage from behavior that causes harm to others. Rather, it was that when transaction costs make it impractical for people to negotiate solutions to such problems on their own, government should create laws and define property rights to encourage behaviors that mimic what people would have agreed to if negotiation had been practical.

My claim is that tax systems that transfer income from rich to poor are a case in point.” They mimic the implicit transfers we observe in virtually every private labor contract, transfers that reflect the costs and benefits of different rungs on the social ladder. Such tax systems facilitate the formation of more stable and diverse societies.

Since High Social Rank Imposes Costs on Others, Why Should It Be Free?

In describing the details of our thought experiment, I tried to construct an environment in which it would be impossible to violate the rights of someone with even the most extreme libertarian sensibilities. Someone who wanted to ride his motorcycle without a helmet, for example, could never be forced to join a society that would strip him of that right. Nor could he be forced to join a society that would tax him against his wishes.

The surprising conclusion of the exercise is that even in such an environment, libertarians would find no reason not to join a society that taxed the rich to pay for income transfers to the poor. If they cared enough about having high social rank, they'd agree to be taxed rather than to be excluded from a society in which they enjoy high rank. And if they didn’t care about having high social rank, they‘ find it advantageous to join a society in which their low social rank boosted their after-tax income.

It’s no surprise, perhaps, that many wealthy libertarians might feel entitled to enjoy their high-ranked position in the social order as a matter of right. But if transaction costs were low enough to permit societies to form and dissolve at will, they couldn't claim that right free of charge. They'd have to bargain for it. And as evidence from the analogous process of bargaining for high-ranked positions in work groups makes clear, those positions do not come cheap.

A wealthy person might prefer to pay for only one of the three steaks he'd just taken from his butcher’s cooler, but that doesn't entitle him to do so. A wealthy person might also prefer to occupy a high-ranked position in the social order free of charge. But he’s not entitled to that privilege, either.

Opportunities Beckon

Attempts to remedy market failure have been a central, if often implicit, focus of human societies from the beginning. Unfortunately, many of those attempts have been compromised by misguided perceptions at both ends of the political spectrum.

Regulatory remedies traditionally embraced by liberals spring from a perception that market failure stems mainly from exploitation by powerful economic elites. Their counterparts on the right object that markets are highly competitive, insisting that Adam Smith’s invisible hand makes regulation unnecessary. But although markets are in fact extremely competitive, conservatives’ faith in the invisible hand is overblown.

As Darwin saw clearly, the fact that unfettered competition in nature often fails to promote the common good has nothing to do with monopoly exploitation. Rather, it's a simple consequence of an often sharp divergence between individual and group interests. Nonhuman animal species couldn't do much about that, and despite their superior communication skills, early humans didn't fare much better. But since the dawn of the industrial age, human societies have made dramatic progress. The explosive material advances of that era have been almost entirely a consequence of new institutional arrangements that narrow the wedge between individual and group interests.

Yet enormously valuable opportunities remain unexploited. The “It’s your money ...” rhetoric that has dominated recent political discourse has made it impossible even to discuss tax and expenditure policy changes that would create large benefits for everyone. In this chapter, I’ve argued that confusion about distributional issues has been an important reason for our failure to seize these opportunities.

The bad news is that opposing parties in the distributional debate embrace their respective positions with such messianic fervor. As we've seen, however, alternative ways of framing this debate hold promise. More egalitarian distributions of resources can be defended not just in abstract moral terms, but also in terms of mutual advantage. And as I'll argue in the next chapter, additional progress will be more likely if we can abandon ill-founded views about the relationship between success and merit. The good news is that because current arrangements are so egregiously inefficient, there's enormous room for improvement.
