Chapter 4. Starve the Beast—But Which One?.

By means of three separate congressional earmarks in 2005, a total B:. $320 million was proposed for the construction of a bridge linking the town of Ketchikan, Alaska, with its airport on Gravina Island. Dubbed “The Bridge to Nowhere,’ the project quickly became a celebrated symbol of waste in government.'

This particular bridge was a terrible idea from the beginning. Ketchikan’s population at the time was less than 9,000 and Gravina’s was only 50. Ferry service provided transportation between the town and the island at a fee of $6, at fifteen- to thirty-minute intervals, depending on the time of day. Having bridge access would have been more convenient, obviously, but nowhere enough so to justify the enormous cost of the project.

Yet if the bridge was such an obvious loser, why was it slated for construction in the first place? The answer to that question reads word-for-word from the dog-eared script of antigovernment crusaders. The politicians who proposed the project hoped to curry favor with the local voters who would directly benefit from it, while foisting the bill on millions of distant and unsuspecting taxpayers, who would never even notice, much less complain about, the eventual small increment in their tax bills. Legislators from other states supported the proposal in the rational expectation of receiving reciprocal support for their own pork projects when the time came.

The encouraging coda to this story is that a firestorm of unfavorable national publicity eventually forced the project’s cancellation. In each congressional budget, however, a host of other proposals survive because they're too small to make it onto the public’s radar screen.

Some boondoggles eventually make the news after the fact. In the 1980s, for example, the Project on Military Procurement (now called the Project on Government Oversight) publicized examples in which private defense contractors were said to have billed the government $435 for a claw hammer, $640 for a toilet seat, and $7,600 for a coffee maker.? The revelations were deeply troubling. If inattentive or corrupt government officials could be induced to pay such prices for familiar items, how much greater might the potential for abuse be in contracts involving complex and difficult-tounderstand equipment?

Starve the Beast

Antigovernment crusaders are clearly onto something. There is waste in government. But the interesting question is what to do about it. Many libertarians believe that the best strategy is to “starve the beast.” Or, as Grover Norquist, president of the antitax advocacy group Americans for Tax Reform, colorfully put it, “I don’t want to abolish government. I simply want to reduce it to the size where I can drag it into the bathroom and drown it in the bathtub.”

Starve-the-beast proponents make a simple point. Since money sent to Washington (or Sacramento or Albany) will inevitably be wasted, the solution is to send as little money as possible to those places. California has been fertile ground for proponents of the starve-the-beast approach because of the state’s unique constitutional provision that permits legislative proposals to be decided directly by voters.

It’s been said that if you want to see where America is headed, you should study California. The state was the first jurisdiction seriously to tackle the problem of air pollution from auto emissions. It led the way in promoting energy-efficient appliances. It was a forerunner in the expansion of rights for women and minorities. It was among the first to confront the issue of secondhand smoke. And it also spawned the antitax crusade that has dominated public discourse for the past three decades.

On June 6, 1978, Proposition 13 won the approval of almost 65 percent of Californians who voted in an election with near-record turnout. Officially called the People’s Initiative to Limit Property Taxation, this measure was popularly known as the Jarvis-Gann Amendment, after the two men who spearheaded the referendum. Howard Jarvis was an Orange County businessman and long-standing tax protestor; Paul Gann was a Sacramento conservative activist. The main provision of their amendment was to limit California property taxes to 1 percent of a property's assessed valuation, which in turn would be prohibited from rising more than 2 percent in any year.

Debate continues about the specific details of Proposition 13's impact on the state. But no one seriously questions that it significantly dampened what had been a long-run upward trend in tax revenues. Unlike the federal government, state governments are generally not permitted to run persistent budget deficits. There is thus little question that Proposition 13 also prevented much government spending that otherwise would have occurred.

Since at least some of that spending would have been wasteful, the supporters of Proposition 13 can claim, without fear of contradiction, to have eliminated some government waste. But it’s a much harder task to persuade neutral observers that Proposition 13 made California a better place to live. All government programs exist because legislators have constituents who favor them. Some of these programs deliver good value for the money. Others are boondoggles. When revenue shortfalls force government to make budget cuts, the best predictor of which programs get the ax is the power of the particular constituents who support them. As Alaska’s Bridge to Nowhere clearly demonstrates, however, the mere fact that a group supports a project does not mean that it serves the broader public interest. The inescapable conclusion, then, is that Proposition 13 has also caused many worthwhile programs to be cut.

What's been the net effect? In his 1998 book Paradise Lost, Peter Schrag grappled with that question.‘ Schrag, who had been the editorial page editor of the Sacramento Bee for nineteen years, offered a meticulously researched and studiously nonpartisan account of the state's economic and social history during the two decades following passage of Proposition 13 and numerous other ballot initiatives aimed at curbing the scope of government.

The portrait that emerges is of a state dramatically different from the one that had been “both model and magnet” for the nation during the generation immediately following World War II. The California government's fiscal position has continued to deteriorate sharply in the years since Paradise Lost was published, and the state's overall prosperity relative to other states has fallen spectacularly. In 2009 alone, for example, revenue shortfalls forced the state to make some $20 billion in additional budget cuts. But even the first twenty years of Proposition 13 had left the state a very different place. Thus, Schrag wrote,

California's schools, which, thirty years ago, had been among the most generously funded in the nation, are now in the bottom quarter among the states in virtually every major indicator—in their physical condition, in public funding, in test scores—closer in most of them to Mississippi than to New York or Connecticut or New Jersey. . . . Its once celebrated freeway system is now rated as among the most dilapidated road networks in the country. Many of its public libraries operate on reduced hours, and some have closed altogether. The state's social benefits, once among the nation’s most generous, have been cut, and cut again, and then cut again. And what had once been a tuition-free college and university system, while still among the world’s great public educational institutions, struggles for funds and charges as much as every other state university system, and in some cases more.”

Proponents of Proposition 13 counter that other factors have been important in the state’s long-run relative decline. Undoubtedly so. Yet the fact remains that chronic revenue shortfalls have been at the core of the state's problems.

Antigovernment activists insist that the best way to deal with revenue shortfalls is to eliminate wasteful government spending. Who, other than the direct beneficiaries of a wasteful program, could possibly object? The difficult question is how to eliminate wasteful spending without inflicting even more costly collateral damage. Experience suggests that the starve-thebeast strategy is not the answer.

The Parasite-Host Analogy

Starve-the-beast proponents might be likened to a doctor who treats a patient suffering from intestinal parasites by ordering him to stop eating. The patient’s food intake, he explains, is the very lifeblood of the parasites. Cut that off, and they will eventually die. Well, yes. But the patient himself may die first, or be seriously damaged in the process. That's why the approved strategies for attacking parasites all take a much more targeted approach. They attempt to inflict damage on the parasites directly, while minimizing collateral damage to their host.

It's instructive to push the parasite-host analogy a step further, by noting that no complex organism is ever completely free of parasites. Yes, the organism benefits from reducing its parasite load, and that’s why natural selection has always favored organisms with effective immune systems. But natural selection has always favored the most effective parasites, too. The battle against parasites entails costs as well as benefits. The rule of thumb for how to wage such battles is the same as that for battles in other domains: Use the most costeffective weapons first, and use them to attack the most dangerous parasites. But eventually a point comes at which the cost of the next weapon exceeds the costs imposed by the most dangerous remaining parasite. Beyond that point, additional parasite reduction actually leaves the organism worse off.° The same logic applies to the problem of waste in government. The best way to reduce it is surely to reach first for the most cost-effective weapons at our disposal and deploy them against the most important causes of waste directly. To do that, of course, we must ask why waste exists in the first place. Often the answer is that politicians support wasteful programs because of demands from important campaign donors.’ A good place for opponents of waste to focus might thus be on legislation that could reduce legislators’ dependence on large campaign contributions. (Small donations pose a less serious threat because the individuals who make them are in no position to extract major concessions from legislators.) The cost of enforcing stricter campaign finance laws would be relatively low, and such laws would be likely to curb some of the most important sources of government waste. But the U.S. Supreme Court has shown little inclination to support stricter campaign finance laws in recent years. On the contrary, its controversial ruling in the Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission case appears to signal the court's intention to roll back even long-standing limits on corporate campaign contributions.* Unless the court reconsiders, opponents of government waste will have to continue working their way down the list of alternative strategies. One lesson of the Bridge to Nowhere episode, for example, was that boondoggles are less likely to survive politically when more voters learn about them. The information revolution has greatly reduced the cost of putting information in front of voters, so we might make some progress there. But the same revolution has also caused explosive growth in the total amount of information that bombards us each day. Thus it may be just as hard as ever to draw voters’ attention to any particular wasteful program.

In short, attacking government waste is a project that will be with us forever. Going forward, new technologies and better institutional design may facilitate significant progress, but they will never eliminate waste entirely.

Spending Cuts That Backfire

For now, our most pressing issue is that although many extremely important tasks remain to be done, government has no money. In July 2010, for example, the Wall Street Journal reported that budget shortfalls around the nation had forced many states to downgrade many asphalt roads to gravel: Paved roads, historical emblems of American achievement, are being torn up across rural America and replaced with gravel or other rough surfaces as counties struggle with tight budgets and dwindling state and federal revenue. State money for local roads was cut in many places amid budget shortfalls. In Michigan, at least 38 of the 83 counties have converted some asphalt roads to gravel in recent years. Last year, South Dakota turned at least 100 miles of asphalt road surfaces to gravel. Counties in Alabama and Pennsylvania have begun downgrading asphalt roads to cheaper chip-and-seal roads, also known as “poor mans pavement.” Some counties in Ohio are simply letting roads erode to gravel.’

The problem is that such moves not only do not end up saving any money, they actually end up costing us. Potholes and other road-surface irregularities cause an average of more than $100 in damage each year to every car and truck on the road, not to mention many needless deaths and serious injuries.” When road maintenance is postponed by even two to three years, the cost of repairs more than doubles. Spending $1 now on road maintenance thus keeps us from having to spend $2 three years from now. Even if we ignore the savings from prevented pothole damage, deaths, and injuries, that's an investment with a rate of return of more than 18 percent a year.

The federal government can borrow at much lower rates than that. The interest rate on ten-year Treasury bills, for example, has not exceeded 5 percent since 2001. Selling T-bills and investing the proceeds at more than 18 percent would immediately make the nation’s balance sheet stronger. Any private business would leap at the opportunity to make an investment like that. And there is no shortage of such opportunities. Some 50 percent of the nation’s major roads and highways are in backlog, meaning that they’re “cracked, crumbled and overdue for repaving.”" But the stranglehold of antitax, antigovernment rhetoric on American political discourse has made it difficult to discuss investments of this sort, even in an economic climate that cries out for additional public investment. I refer, of course, to the deep economic downturn spawned by the financial crisis of 2008.

Before late 2007, total spending was sufficient to create jobs for almost everyone. But then the housing boom began to unravel. Consumption, which had been unsustainably inflated by home equity loans based on illusory housing prices, fell sharply. Businesses began to lay people off, which produced further declines in consumption. Falling consumption, in turn, caused a parallel decline in investment, because most businesses already had the capacity to produce more than people wanted to buy. And with the economies of most other countries also in the doldrums, demand for American exports also fell. By late 2008, output and employment were plummeting even faster than they had at the beginning of the Great Depression.

When the world economy plunged into deep depression in the 1930s, many economists believed that the best policy response was to balance government budgets. And since falling incomes had caused tax revenues to fall sharply, that meant some combination of reduced government spending and higher tax rates. President Herbert Hoover’s approach to the Great Depression was informed by that prevailing economic orthodoxy. So it seems hardly fair to fault him for having implemented policies that actually made the depression worse, not better.

President Franklin Roosevelt appeared to understand intuitively that the prevailing orthodoxy was mistaken. Ignoring it, he vigorously expanded government spending for public construction projects that put the unemployed to work directly. But it was only when John Maynard Keynes published The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money in 1936 that economists had a coherent theoretical framework within which to understand why Roosevelt’s intuition was correct.'* Keynes, widely viewed as the greatest economist of the twentieth century, earned his reputation by explaining why a deeply depressed economy generally wouldn't recover quickly on its own.

Consumers won't lead the way, he argued, because even those who still have jobs are fearful they might lose them. Nor will businesses invest, since they already have more capacity than they need. Only government, Keynes concluded, has both the motive and opportunity to boost spending significantly during deep downturns.

Although most economists now favor the Keynesian approach to combating deep economic downturns, an influential group of dissenters has inspired libertarians and other antigovernment activists to oppose all economic stimulus measures. On many occasions, I have pressed members of this group to explain why boosting government spending won't speed the recovery of a depressed economy. In most cases, they have been either unwilling or unable to offer a clear response. So I was grateful when I saw the economist Lee Ohanian’s attempt to explain why government spending won't help. The crux of his argument is that “the higher taxes on incomes or expenditures that ultimately accompany higher spending depress economic activity.”

The stimulus opponents’ argument thus boils down to this striking claim: When the government spends borrowed funds now, consumers will realize that the resulting debt spells higher taxes in the future, which will lead them to curtail their current spending. Those cutbacks will offset the increased government spending dollar for dollar, leaving no net stimulus.

Such claims have led many psychologists to describe economists as haying “high IQ but no clue.” There may be people who would actually spend less now to hedge against uncertain future tax liabilities. It’s unlikely, though, that you know any of them. As behavioral economists have been pointing out for decades, that’s just not the way most people behave. Hardly any consumers even know how big the national debt is, much less how it might affect their future tax bills.

Standard economic models predict that people will save enough during their working lives to avoid having to reduce their standard of living in retirement. Evidence suggests, however, that most people save far too little to meet that goal.'* Even the prospect of having to eat pet food in retirement is not enough to spur them to save more. Yet antigovernment activists want us to believe that the possibility of facing unspecified tax liabilities at some unknown future date would cause people to increase savings by enough to offset every penny of additional government spending.

It's an absurd claim, but in a climate dominated by antitax, antigovernment rhetoric, the mere fact that some people say economic stimulus won't work is enough to halt conversation. We're told that economic stimulus financed by borrowed money will raise the national debt, which will impoverish our grandchildren. And since most people don’t want to impoverish their grandchildren, the discussion ends there.

But prudent public investment does not impoverish our grandchildren at all. On the contrary, when the government borrows money at 4 percent and invests it in a project that yields 18 percent during an economic downturn, the effect is not only to put people to work who otherwise would have been sitting idle but also to enrich our grandchildren.

In an economy at full employment, it would of course be even better to pay for such investments with tax revenue rather than with borrowed money. But antitax rhetoric has apparently ruled out that option, even for residents who would directly benefit from the specific government investments being paid for. Thus, as Wall Street Journal reporter Lauren Etter notes, many of the North Dakota residents who complain most bitterly about the deteriorating quality of their roads seem disinclined to consider the obvious remedy: “In June, Stutsman County residents rejected a measure that would have generated more money for roads by increasing property and sales taxes. Td rather my kids drive on a gravel road than stick them with a big tax bill? said Bob Baumann, as he sipped a bottle of Coors Light at the Sportsman's Bar Café and Gas in Spiritwood.”” It’s not uncommon for stones thrown up by a car on a gravel road to crack a trailing car’s windshield, which can cost $1,000 to replace. Such events happen much less frequently on asphalt roads. That's just one among a host of good reasons for having paved our roads in the first place. Refusing to maintain them is a false economy, plain and simple. But that’s what happens when public discussion of taxes is off limits.

Obstacles to Creating Good Government

To repeat, my point is not that governments are never wasteful. Waste happens. Many antigovernment activists arrive at their position in the sincere belief that government does more harm than good. And indeed there can be little doubt that many governments around the world have caused enormous harm. Even today, there are many countries in which ordinary citizens are afraid to call the police when someone steals their property. In these countries, corruption is the norm rather than the exception.

Transparency International, a Berlin-based nonprofit group, conducts periodic surveys to assess the quality of the world’s governments. The organization publishes a Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI), based on its definition of corruption as “the abuse of public office for private gain.” Its surveys ask respondents to report “the degree to which corruption is perceived to exist among a country’s public officials and politicians.” Some countries, such as Myanmar and Somalia, are perennially near the bottom of Transparency International’s CPI. It’s no accident that they and other persistently low scorers on that index—which include Afghanistan, Haiti, Tonga, and Uzbekistan—are among the poorest nations on the planet.

Yet no matter how bad the typical government might seem to be, it’s striking to note that there are no countries without a government. The territory of any such country would have long since been invaded and claimed by some other country with a government and an army. If government is unavoidable, our challenge is to come up with the best one possible.

Notwithstanding the rhetoric of antigovernment crusaders, there seem to be some governments that are relatively free from corruption and do at least a reasonable job of responding to their citizens’ demands for public goods and services. In a three-way tie for the least corrupt government on Transparency International's 2007 list were Denmark, Finland, and New Zealand. Singapore, Sweden, Iceland, The Netherlands, Switzerland, Canada, and Norway rounded out that year’s top ten in that order.” Here, too, it’s surely no accident that most of these countries are among the richest on the planet.

The causality undoubtedly runs in both directions. Having a more honest and effective government helps support activities that raise per-capita income. And being richer generally makes citizens more able and willing to support more effective forms of governance. But the correlation between per-capita income and the CPI is far from perfect. For example, the United States, which had higher per-capita income than any of the top ten on the 2007 CPI, ranked only twentieth-best on that list, primarily because of perceptions that our campaign finance system had corrupted Congress.

In countries with honest and effective governments, the view that promoting good government is a worthwhile investment would not strike most observers as absurd. Yet that does not seem to be the position of antigovernment evangelists in the United States, many of whom view government service with thinly veiled contempt. As Ronald Reagan often remarked, “Government’s view of the economy could be summed up in a few short phrases: If it moves, tax it. If it keeps moving, regulate it. And if it stops moving, subsidize it.” The foundation of honest and effective government is a professional civil service that takes pride in its work. Fostering a climate in which government is viewed with contempt inevitably makes it more difficult to recruit talented and dedicated civil servants.

But when antigovernment evangelists themselves assume the reins of state power, it’s not clear that those are the kinds of civil servants they're looking to appoint. It’s easy to see how someone whose core philosophy is that government has no useful mission might see no harm in appointing cronies with little interest in the task at hand. But as experience in the wake of Hurricane Katrina vividly demonstrated, appointing incompetent friends who don't care about the mission of the government agencies they head often plays out poorly.

No sensible person believes that eliminating government is an option. If we must have a government, then, it’s surely worth thinking seriously about how to promote good government. What public goods and services do we want? How can we best raise the money to pay for them? And how can we attract the kinds of civil servants were willing to install in positions of trust?

Our immediate problem, however, is a more pressing practical one— namely that existing financial commitments far exceed current tax revenues. With the baby boom generation swelling the ranks of retirees during the next two decades, this fiscal gap will grow dramatically. We should of course continue searching for creative ways to bridge as much of that gap as possible by reducing waste in government. But when pressure to trim budgets starts turning asphalt roads into gravel ones, that's a credible signal that cuts have gone too far.

Antigovernment crusaders are right that eliminating waste is a better way to free up resources than eliminating things we value. They take it as given that the lion’s share of all waste in a market economy resides in government. As they're fond of saying, people spend their own money far more carefully than the bureaucrats in Washington do.

Maybe so. On a closer look, however, not all of the famous examples of government waste turn out to be as shocking as they first appear. For example, the $7,600 coffee pot mentioned at the beginning of this chapter was produced at Lockheed at the time Ronald Dubose, a college classmate of mine, was working for that company. Lockheed also produced the famous $640 toilet seats. Dubose describes himself as a libertarian, and he is inclined to view government spending as extremely wasteful in general. But in an email exchange about these particular projects, he had this to say:

I was at Lockheed when the infamous coffee pot story surfaced. In fact, I was in charge of testing the coffee pot. Here is the rest of the story: Airplanes have two types of power: 28 volts, direct current; and 115 volts, alternating current, 400 Hz. The coffee pot had to be designed to run on the 400 Hz power, which made it completely different from your kitchen version. 400 Hz is used because it makes motors and things smaller and lighter than 60 Hz versions. The lifetime cost of every pound of airplane weight is enormous, given that fuel must be provided to carry it everywhere for 40 years or so. So this is a sensible economic decision. The next thing to remember is that the C5 total production run is only about 120 units, so development costs have little in the denominator. Finally everything on an airplane must be tested to be sure it will work under military conditions and won't start a fire or something. These tests usually include MIL STD 810 Environmental Testing. This includes shock, vibration, high/low temp, and so on. So the unit has to take being dropped (hard landing) and shaken violently for hours. Just running these tests is very expensive and getting it to pass also adds cost. So it has always been misleading to complain about the coffee maker. I’m surprised it was so cheap considering the initial cost and the low run numbers. I suppose they could bring a thermos, which most military planes require but the C5 was a troop carrier and I’m sure the guys appreciated the “investment.”

The famous “toilet seat” was not my responsibility because it was on the C130; however, it was not the seat one sees at Ace Hardware. What they refer to is the molded Fiberglas “surround” that you see in commercial planes. It is about 3’ cubed and it covers the bowl assembly. The actual “seat” attaches to it. Anyway, the cost was completely reasonable considering that low runs require custom molds and hand layup methods.

Even if the most famous examples of government waste turn out to have been misleading, however, there must be many other examples in which government purchasing agents did, in fact, fail to negotiate reasonable prices on their orders. Everything we know about human nature suggests that someone would be more likely to search out low prices when spending his own money than when spending someone else's. And the private sector is also intensely competitive, which helps keep prices reasonably close to actual production costs.

Waste in the Private Sector

Even though most people shop pretty carefully for the things they want, there’s actually considerably more waste in the private sector than in the public sector, and not just because the private sector is so much larger. Most waste in the private sector occurs not because people pay too much for any given good or service, but because the outlays required to achieve many important goals often depend on how much other people in similar circumstances are spending. This is yet another instance of Darwin's insight that individual and group incentives often diverge sharply.

Consider the task of staging a coming-of-age party for your son or daughter. It’s a special occasion, and you want it to seem like one. But what that means, exactly, is heavily dependent on context. In 2005, a New York CEO spent $10 million to stage a coming-of-age celebration in which more than 150 of his daughter's friends gathered in the Rainbow Room atop Rockefeller Center. At the end of the evening, after having been serenaded by 50 Cent, Don Henley, Aerosmith, Stevie Nicks, and other headliners, each guest went home with a bag of party favors that included a $300 video iPod, the musthave object of that moment.”

Though he was roundly criticized for his extravagance at the time, it's possible to imagine that this father’s motives were completely benign. He may have wanted merely to stage a party that would communicate to the world the depth of his love for his daughter, an event that shed remember as having been truly special. But special is a relative concept. And because others in his financial circle were also spending large sums to stage special parties for their own children, the standard that defined special in his case was very high. It was much higher, certainly, than the corresponding standard thirty years earlier, for the simple reason that wealthy families now have so much more money than they did then.

Middle-income consumers and wealthy CEOs travel in largely nonoverlapping social circles, but the standards that define special occasions have been rising for middle-income families, too. Consider, for example, MaryEllen Fillo’s account of recent trends among such families in Connecticut:

“I read an article about parties for teenagers titled ‘Don’t You Wish Your Party Was Hot Like Mine; and that said it all,” said Susan Reardon, a Litchfield County mother who is planning a $12,000 birthday party for her nearly 16-year-old daughter, Grace. Those plans include specially designed invitations, a tented backyard with linen-covered round tables, a dance floor, a band, an ice cream sundae bar and DVDs of the celebration for all the guests."

Families up and down the income ladder are spending more each year to celebrate special occasions for loved ones. The average cost of an American wedding in 2009 was $28,082.” The corresponding figure in 1980 (also in 2009 dollars) was $11,213.71 The collective effect of all this extra spending has been largely just to raise the bar that defines special occasions. The events end up costing substantially more than they used to, but no one walks away feeling any more special than before.

Rising Income Inequality and Expenditure Cascades

The libertarian’s faith in Adam Smith’s invisible hand rests on the assumption that consumer spending is essentially independent of context. Yet context is often decisive, and when it is, the incentives that drive individual spending often produce results that are profoundly wasteful. The explosive growth of CEO pay in recent decades, for example, has led many executives to build larger and larger mansions. But those mansions have long since passed the point at which greater absolute size yields additional utility. Most executives need or want larger mansions simply because the standards that define large have changed.

The driving force behind that change has been a fundamental shift in the pattern of income growth. During the generation immediately following World War II, incomes grew at about the same rate—just under 3 percent— for families all along the income scale. But sometime around 1970, that pattern shifted. Since then, income growth has been significantly slower on average, except for families near the top of the income distribution, whose incomes have been growing at almost record high rates. CEOs of the largest corporations in the United States, for example, earned roughly 40 times as much as the average American worker in 1980, but now earn more than 400 times as much. The same pattern shows up no matter how we slice the data. The higher up people are on the income ladder, the faster their incomes have grown.”

This shift has spawned a phenomenon I call expenditure cascades.” Top earners build bigger mansions simply because they have more money. The middle class shows little evidence of being offended by that. On the contrary, many seem drawn to photo essays and TV programs about the lifestyles of the rich and famous. But the larger mansions of the rich shift the frame of reference that defines acceptable housing for the near-rich, who travel in many of the same social circles. Perhaps it has become the custom in those circles to host dinner parties for thirty-six rather than twenty-four, or to host wedding receptions at home rather than in a hotel or club. So the nearrich build bigger, too, and that shifts the relevant framework for others just below them, and so on, all the way down the income scale. By 2007, the median new single-family house built in the United States had an area of more than 2,300 square feet, some 50 percent more than its counterpart from 1970.

Today’s median earners don't build bigger houses and spend more to celebrate special occasions because they have more money. The incomes of families in the middle have actually grown very little during the past three decades. They’re building bigger and spending more because other people like them are also building bigger and spending more, and that, in turn, is happening because of the changing pattern of income growth. Similar expenditure cascades have been taking place not just in housing and parties for special occasions, but in a host of other domains as well.

Not all of the extra spending has been for naught, of course. A bigger, clearer diamond, for example, refracts the light in ways that even a solitary inhabitant of a desert island would be likely to find more pleasing. But much of the extra spending has been profoundly wasteful. Once mansions pass a certain size, the demand for additional space is driven almost exclusively by social forces having nothing to do with the intrinsic utility of the extra space itself. Yet owning a bigger mansion entails considerable extra hassle. At the very least, one must recruit and oversee a bigger staff to operate and maintain it, which increases the risk that a disgruntled employee will publish an unflattering tell-all memoir. And so on. If all of the biggest mansions were a little smaller, the people who own them would actually be happier than before.

If we add to that observation the fact that total consumer spending is more than twice as large as total government spending, my assertion that there is more waste in the private sector than in the public sector should not strike any reasonable observer as implausible. The Way Forward

The important question, in any event, is not whether private waste is larger than public waste, but rather where we should focus our search for additional resources to address pressing budget shortfalls. Efforts to eliminate government waste have been under way for a long time, and experience cautions against expecting sudden major breakthroughs on that front. Starving that particular beast often appears to have done more harm than good. The shifting standards that define what people feel they must spend to achieve their goals constitute a very different kind of beast. To emphasize the role that context plays in many important consumption decisions, I'll call it the positional consumption beast. It’s a dramatically more voracious beast than government ever was.

The search for ways to eliminate private waste is still in its infancy. The good news, as I'll explain in the next chapter, is that private waste is actually much easier to eliminate than public waste. The positional consumption beast, it turns out, can be starved by relatively simple, unintrusive changes in incentives.
