Chapter 3. No Cash on the Table.

Adam Smith’s concerns ABOUT THE efficacy of the invisible hand focused on the ability of powerful actors to limit competition. Liberal skeptics of the marketplace were quick to embrace those concerns and continue to see limited competition as the most important cause of market failure. But as Charles Darwin saw clearly, even perfect competition will not always guide behavior in ways that promote the common good. Individual and group interests often diverge sharply, he realized, and in such cases individual interest generally carries the day.

An important feature of Darwin's narrative is that market failure can occur even when all individuals have taken full advantage of all available opportunities for potential gain. Recall Thomas Schelling’s hockey players who skate without helmets when permitted to do so, yet vote overwhelmingly-in favor of rules that require them to wear helmets. As in that example, the kinds of market failure Darwin envisioned can happen even when individuals are fully informed and rational. Even though it would be better for all bull elk if each animal’s antlers were smaller, it would not be in any individual bull’s interest to have smaller antlers.

In contrast, imperfect competition can lead to market failure only if some individuals persistently fail to take advantage of available options that would benefit them. In the familiar economist’s metaphor, some individuals must be leaving cash on the table. And that, I'll argue, is a fatal flaw in conventional accounts of market failure.

Why Haven’t Labor-Managed Firms Proliferated?

My first exposure to this particular flaw came during discussions with a group of economists in my department during my early years at Cornell. Members of this group had developed a research program focused on worker-managed firms. They were deeply committed to ideals of social justice and extremely skeptical about conventional hierarchical capitalist firms. Such firms, they believed, were the source of pollution, alienation, and a long inventory of other serious social ills. They were confident that the surest way to eliminate those ills was to replace the traditional model of industrial enterprise with a new model—one that placed employees at the helm.

In light of evidence that people place high value on personal autonomy, this view did not seem totally implausible.’ Studies suggest that happier workers are also more productive,’ and it’s easy to see how working for a firm whose mission you don't believe in and being ordered around all day by an autocratic boss might undermine your morale. Proponents of labormanaged economic systems felt sure that things would change dramatically for the better once workers were placed in charge. As three senior researchers in this nascent field put it at the time,

Workers in more participatory workplaces are not only more productive but also more satisfied with their jobs. We could apparently increase hourly output by at least 15 percent without pushing workers harder or exposing them to greater workplace hazards. This waste elimination would come from greater work commitment, not speedup.

It would capitalize on all the current worker effort currently WASTED in capitalist enterprises through working to rules, through slowdown and shirking, through direct worker resistance.’

It's a remarkable claim. If any firm could achieve the productivity increases described in this passage while simultaneously making its workers happier, it would enjoy a prodigious competitive advantage. Since wages account for about 70 percent of a typical firm’s total cost, increasing productivity by 15 percent would reduce total cost by more than 10 percent. The firm could cut its prices by almost that amount and still remain profitable, which would enable it to peel off most of its rivals’ customers. And because its workers would be happier, it would have its pick of the best talent, which would further increase its competitive advantage. In short, this narrative implied that there were prodigious sums of cash on the table. Any firm that enjoyed these advantages should sweep the market like a prairie fire, reaping enormous profits in the process.

Labor-managed firms in fact have a long history in the United States and other industrial economies. Small family businesses are perhaps the most widespread example. But many other cooperative ventures also populate this category. When I was a graduate student in Berkeley in the late 1960s, many of us shopped at Leopold’s, an employee-managed record store. Many cities have cooperatively owned and managed food retailers.

Yet these organizations occupy an extremely circumscribed niche in the economy. There is absolutely no evidence that they're poised to sweep the marketplace. That observation raises a basic question: If labor-managed firms are so great, why don't we see more of them?

I once put this question to several of my colleagues in the Cornell labormanaged systems group—a collection of very smart people who appeared to take it seriously. After much discussion, their considered response was that labor-managed firms had failed to proliferate because financial markets refused to make capital available to them on fair terms. Banks, they explained, had a long history of dealing with conventional capitalist firms. They knew the players in that community well and felt they understood the risks well enough to be able to evaluate loan applications intelligently. In support of this explanation, one of my colleagues produced a copy of a bank’s loan application form that a local labor-managed firm had been required to fill out. It was twice as long as the same bank’s normal application form and asked many more probing questions.

My response was that this handicap couldn't possibly explain why labormanaged firms had failed to proliferate. If these firms enjoy more than a 10 percent cost advantage over conventional firms, they can certainly afford to spend the extra time it takes to fill out longer loan application forms. Indeed, they should be able to grow and prosper even if the banking system were to cut them off completely. Most businesses start out small. One with a significant cost advantage might have to grow more slowly for a while if it were denied outside sources of credit, but a 10 percent cost advantage is itself a substantial source of internal capital for expansion.

More important, the very idea that a capitalist banking system might persistently deny funds to creditworthy borrowers strains credulity. All business loans entail at least some risk. But any firm with a 10 percent cost advantage over its rivals would be at the extreme low end of the risk scale. If bankers were frightened because they weren't accustomed to dealing with labor-managed firms, their traditional response would be not to deny credit altogether, but rather to charge a higher interest rate. And any firm with a 10 percent cost advantage could easily absorb a higher interest rate.

Others have written that banks might be reluctant to lend to labormanaged firms because they believe that enabling that ownership structure to spread over time would severely threaten the long-run interests of the capitalist system.* But to suppose that a banker would pass up the opportunity to make a profitable loan for that reason is to completely misunderstand the very essence of capitalism. Capitalism begins with the assumption that people are greedy. In the most widely quoted passage from The Wealth of Nations, Smith wrote, “It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest: Bankers aren't altruists on a mission to promote the interests of their class at their personal expense. They're just capitalists trying to make a buck. So even if we grant the implausible assumption that loans to labormanaged firms would eventually undermine the capitalist system, a rational banker would still have no motive to refrain from making them.

The problem is analogous to the tragedy of the commons that leads to overfishing, which I will discuss in more detail in chapter 10. This is another form of market failure that results from the wedge between individual and group incentives described by Charles Darwin. Fishermen don't deplete their fisheries because they're stupid. It happens because no single person's decision to enter the fishing industry has any measurable effect on the ultimate outcome. Similarly in banking, if enough bankers lend money to labormanaged firms, the resulting prosperity of those firms might cause the capitalist system to crumble, but nothing would have played out differently if any particular banker had held back. Under the circumstances, there's simply no rational motive for a greedy banker to pass up a profitable lending opportunity, even if she is deeply committed to the goal of preserving the capitalist enterprise in its current form. Her own restraint would cost her some profits, but it wouldn't make capitalism's survival any more likely.

And why would a banker feel committed to a goal like that in the first place? Banks could survive quite nicely in a world in which most of their clients were labor-managed firms. And if costs were really 10 percent lower in a world like that, banks themselves would eventually become labor managed. So a bank that gained early experience with that type of enterprise would actually enjoy a powerful competitive advantage.

As noted, however, there is no compelling evidence that labor-managed firms enjoy a competitive advantage at all. On a visit to Berkeley years after I had finished my graduate work there, I noticed that Leopold's, the employeemanaged record store, was no longer in the storefront location it had occupied during my student days. When I asked a friend what had become of it, he said it had gone out of business a few years earlier. But its main competitor, an outlet of the Discount Records chain located nearby, was still a going concern.

Again, labor-managed firms have been around for a long time, but they have never occupied more than a small portion of the economic terrain. There is no indication whatsoever that they’re poised to take over the marketplace. The only way to make sense of these facts is to conclude that the labor-managed firm may have some advantages over conventional firms on some of the critical dimensions of performance that predict and explain market success, but that it must also perform less well on other dimensions. The employees at Leopold's, for example, may have enjoyed the sense of empowerment that came from having a voice in day-to-day management decisions, which in turn may have made them more productive. But over time, perhaps they grew weary of having to attend so many meetings. Or perhaps the difficulty is that workers who are put in charge produce the kinds of products they think would be good for people, rather than those that people actually want.

Markets Don’t lgnore Profit Opportunities for Long

My exchanges with the evangelists for labor-managed firms were an object lesson in the power of ideology to disable the capacity for critical thinking. My colleagues knew there were grave shortcomings in the market system, and they were equally sure that capitalist exploitation was the cause of those problems. But it was precisely that faith that made them unwilling or unable to examine the broader implications of their theory.

Over the years I have urged my students to disengage their ideological leanings as completely as possible when thinking about questions of market failure. If they have a hypothesis about why a market has failed in some particular way, the first and most important test of that hypothesis is whether it implies that people have been leaving cash on the table. The narrative put forward by the evangelists for labor-managed firms fails that test unambiguously. If those firms deliver the kinds of advantages claimed by their proponents, entrepreneurs could make billions of dollars by buying conventional firms and reorganizing them as labor-managed units. they'd need only buy up the stock of an existing conventional firm, shift decision authority to workers, then sell shares in the restructured firm to the new worker-owners. Because the new firm would be much more efficient than the one it replaced, those shares would sell for much more than they cost to acquire. And yet, as noted, the predicted stampede to reorganize firms in this way never materialized.

In short, theories that imply that vast sums of cash are being left on the table for extended periods are bad theories. Any market situation that has remained stable for an extended period is overwhelmingly likely to be one in which there are not large sums of cash on the table. Yet many of the explanations offered by those who have denounced market outcomes from the left fail the no-cash-on-the-table test. These critics, for example, often claim that we must regulate workplace safety because workers would otherwise be exploited by powerful economic elites. At first glance, the claim may sound plausible. The owners of the enterprise, after all, often have more money than they can possibly spend, while their workers risk life and limb each day for barely a living wage. That certainly looks like exploitation. But as [ll explain, it’s also an account that implies vast amounts of cash on the table.

Suppose there were a woodworker at risk of injury because the employer's table saw had no guard over the blade. Should the employer have installed one? Any intelligent answer to that question must rest on a comparison of the costs and benefits of the device. If the worker owned the business and had to make the decision on his own, the calculation would be straightforward. The cost of the device is easy to measure, and for the sake of discussion let's assume it to be $50 a week. The benefit of the device is the largest dollar amount he'd be willing to sacrifice to gain the blade guard’s protection, which of course depends on how dangerous it is to operate the saw without one. If he'd pay up to $100, say, then installing the blade guard would clearly make sense. But if it’s worth, say, only $30 to him, then he'd choose not to install it.

The logic of the decision is no different when the woodworker is employed by a firm. It’s still necessary to compare the blade guard’s cost with its benefit. The fact that the employer would be writing the check for the device does nothing to change its cost. And its benefit is still the value, in the worker’s eyes, of the protection it would provide. Let’s suppose the blade guard meets the cost-benefit test, since that’s the more interesting case. If it’s worth $100 a week to the woodworker and costs only $50 a week to install and maintain, then the employer has every incentive to provide it. Failure to do so would be to forgo the $50 of economic surplus it could have created.

Skeptics of the invisible hand insist the capitalist employer's greed motivates him to withhold the device. But that charge misses the essence of Adam Smith's argument. If an employer failed to install a safety device that met the cost-benefit test, there would be cash on the table available to any rival employer willing to install one. The device costs only $50 a week, remember, and the woodworker values it at $100 a week. It’s fair to assume that his current employer isn't losing money by employing him at his current salary. So if a rival offered him a saw with a blade guard at a salary only $75 less than his current salary, the offer would be accepted. After the move, the woodworker would enjoy $25 in additional economic surplus each week (the $100 value he assigns to the blade guard less the $75 cut in salary). And his new employer would also be better off by $25 a week (assuming his costs were otherwise similar to the current employer's). Any time an employer refuses to install a piece of safety equipment that passes the cost-benefit test, then, there will always be cash on the table.

Many critics of the market system respond that it’s morally reprehensible to use cost-benefit analysis for deciding whether a safety device should be installed. But that objection fails to withstand even minimal scrutiny. Safety devices cost money that could be used to purchase other things people value. It’s impossible to create a world in which the risk of unfavorable outcomes is zero. When deciding which safety steps to take, we must compare costs and benefits.

If you disagree, I pose two simple questions: Did you get your car’s brakes checked today? If so, do you plan to get them checked again tomorrow? No sensible person answers yes to both questions. If the brakes on your car have just been found to be in good working order, the odds of them failing the next day are vanishingly small. Getting them checked takes time and costs money, so reasonable people do it only at intervals. States that have automobile inspection programs usually specify yearly checks. Most people don't get their brakes checked more often than that because doing so would be expensive and wouldn't yield significant benefits. If the cost-benefit framework is the right way to think about how often to get your brakes checked, why isn't it also the right framework for thinking about whether there should be a blade guard on a table saw?

Other skeptics of the market respond that the invisible-hand argument might be persuasive if labor markets were truly competitive, but go on to insist that labor markets are not, in fact, competitive. Without doubt, there is less mobility in labor markets than in many other markets. Once someone signs on with an employer, for example, many of the skills she develops over time are of more value to that employer than to rival employers, which makes it steadily less likely that shed garner an attractive outside offer. At some point she becomes, in effect, a captive employee.° But even if she were forced to stick with the same employer forever, it still wouldn't make sense for her employer to withhold a safety device that met the cost-benefit test. Both she and her employer would do better if the employer bought the device and then cut her salary by enough to cover its cost. Market skeptics might respond that captive workers are paid so little that they couldn't afford as much as they'd be willing to pay if they earned a truly competitive wage. In that case, however, a country that was inclined to regulate would have a far better option. It could simply require that firms pay higher wages. Employees could then decide for themselves whether additional safety measures were worth their cost.

In any event, the claim that labor markets are not competitive must not be pushed too far. Mobility isn’t perfect, but people change jobs far more frequently than in the past. And even when firms know that most of their employees are unlikely to move, some do move and others eventually retire or die. So employers must maintain their ability to attract a steady flow of new applicants, which means they must nurture their reputations. There are few secrets in the information age. A firm that exploits its workers will eventually experience serious hiring difficulties.

In sum, to insist that a worker's saw is “too dangerous” is to insist that the cost of making it safer would be less than the corresponding benefit. If labor markets were competitive and workers valued a safer saw enough to cover its additional cost, the employer would have a strong incentive to provide it, lest a rival employer poach his worker. If neither happens, the presumption is that the worker does not, in fact, value the safer saw enough to cover its additional cost. He might be glad to have it for free, but he is not willing to pay for it.

More detailed accounts of the invisible-hand story go on to explain how the market serves up a broad menu of choices regarding workplace safety. Some firms offer high wages and low safety, others offer low wages and high safety, and still others offer intermediate values of the two. Faced with this menu, workers sort themselves across firms as their individual preferences dictate. Tastes differ along many dimensions, of course, but for present purposes the two that matter are attitudes toward risk and desires for the things that money can buy.

For the most cautious people who happen also to care least about money, the best option is a job at the extreme low end of the risk scale. That job gives them the safety they crave, and because money doesn’t loom especially large in their eyes, the lower wage is acceptable. At the other extreme are those with the least cautious attitudes toward risk and the most pressing desires for additional income. For them, the riskiest job is the best option. It maximizes their pay, and they’re relatively tolerant of its extra risk. People with less extreme preferences on these two dimensions do best by choosing jobs with intermediate values of wages and safety.

According to the traditional invisible-hand account, then, workers get as much safety on the job as they're willing to pay for. Since making jobs safer requires real resources that could be used for other things we value, that’s as it should be. If a worker doesn’t get the extra safety he claims he wanted, that must mean he didn’t value it enough to be willing to pay its cost.

Why Skepticism about the Invisible Hand Persists

Market skeptics often respond, tellingly, by citing behavior by employers that seems transparently at odds with the invisible hand’s rosy portrayal of market outcomes. Walmart, the nation’s largest retailer, has often been their target. On numerous occasions, for example, the company has locked overnight maintenance workers into stores with no supervisor present to let them out in case of emergency. Walmart defended this step as necessary to control theft, but it has led to at least some instances in which employees were unable to receive timely care for medical emergencies. The company has also been accused and convicted of a host of other violations of labor laws, including altering employee time records to avoid overtime payments. If that’s not exploitation, it’s a convincing simulacrum.’

Of course, Walmart has also brought many benefits to the communities it serves, most notably a broad array of products at low prices made possible by its tireless cost-cutting. Yet throughout its history, the company has also moved aggressively to oppose various laws and regulations that libertarians and other antigovernment activists view as unwarranted intrusions on the invisible hand of the marketplace.’ Many of the behaviors that these laws and regulations aim to prevent certainly seem to be ones worth preventing. And yet, by all available evidence, the marketplace is more competitive now than it’s been at any point in history.

If the market is truly competitive, what makes those regulations necessary? What prevents the invisible hand from working its magic?

An Alternative Explanation of Market Failure

The explanation I propose is simple.’ It rests on Darwin's central insight that the interests of individuals are often in conflict with those of broader groups. In the standard invisible-hand account, as noted in chapter 1, the fact that a worker is willing to accept lower safety in exchange for higher wages implies that the extra income was sufficient compensation for reduced safety. But the invisible-hand narrative assumes that extra income is valued only for the additional absolute consumption it supports. A higher wage, however, also confers a second benefit for certain (and right away) that safety only provides in the rare cases when the guard is what keeps the careless hand from the blade—the ability to consume more relative to others.

That fact is nowhere more important than in the case of parents’ desires to send their children to the best possible schools. As noted in chapter 1, a worker might well accept a riskier job at a higher wage because doing so would cover the monthly payments on a house in a better school district. But the same observation applies to other workers. And because school quality is an inherently relative concept, when others also trade safety for higher wages, no one will move forward in relative terms. They'd succeed only in bidding up the prices of houses in better school districts.

Hence the attraction of safety regulations, even in perfectly competitive labor markets in which all workers are perfectly informed about the risks they face. Workers confronting these incentives might well prefer an alternative state of the world in which all enjoyed greater safety, even at the expense of all having lower wages. But workers can control only their own job choices, not the choices of others. If any individual worker accepted a safer job while others didn't, that worker would be forced to send her children to inferior schools. To get the outcome they desire, workers must act in unison.

But merely knowing that individual actions are mutually offsetting doesn’t eliminate the incentive to take those actions. Societies around the globe have settled on a similar set of policies to encourage greater workplace safety than unregulated private labor markets would provide. In the United States, for example, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration prescribes detailed safety procedures that must be followed in different industries. Firms are also required to carry workman's compensation insurance, whose rates rise sharply with the number of injury claims filed. These instruments are far from perfect, but there's little doubt that workplace safety levels are higher because of them.

Skeptics of big government often denounce such policies as unjustified violations of individual liberty. For example, as Thaler and Sunstein describe safety regulations, “they impose flat bans, and they undoubtedly do hurt some people. Such laws do not permit individual workers to trade their right to (what the government considers to be) a safe work environment in return for a higher salary, even if sophisticated and knowledgeable people might like to do that.” The implication is that, for well-informed workers at least, Adam Smith’s invisible hand would provide the best combinations of wages and safety even without regulation. Yet that belief is indefensible when people care strongly about relative position.

As Darwin clearly recognized, many of the most important domains of life are graded on the curve. It’s relative income, not absolute income, that predicts who will be able to buy a house in a good school district, or one with a breathtaking view. And when relative income is important, the invisible hand breaks down. There’s no longer any reason to believe that individual incentives guide resources to their most valuable uses.

Again, note the striking similarity between my proposed explanation for safety regulation and Thomas Schelling’s proposed explanation for hockey helmet rules."' As discussed in chapter 1, Schelling began with the observation that hockey players who are left to their own devices invariably skate without helmets, yet voice a strong preference for rules that require helmets. The discrepancy, he explained, is the result of a conflict between individual and group incentives. When an individual player removes his helmet, he gains a slight competitive edge, something he considers far more than enough to trump the slight increase in his odds of being seriously hurt. And because other players confront those same incentives, the inevitable result is that all players skate without helmets. Neither team’s players gain the competitive edge they were seeking, yet all end up facing increased risk of serious injury, hence their support for the helmet requirement.

Merely understanding the incentive structure that produced their problem does not solve it. They need a forceful way to change individual incentives. And that’s exactly what they get when the league adopts a helmet requirement. The only recourse open to players who insist on skating without a helmet is to form a league of their own. It’s the same with safety regulation in the workplace. Those who don't want to be coerced by safety regulation can move to a country that doesn't regulate safety. But as we'll see in chapter 12, the only such countries are probably ones they wouldn't want to live in.

Note also that the explanation I propose for safety regulation does not imply that people were leaving cash on the table before safety was regulated. As in Schelling’s helmet example, the market outcome in the absence of regulation was one in which each individual had chosen the best option available. Ifa rival firm came along and offered a safer job at a lower wage, no one would have taken it, because that would have meant having to move to an inferior school district.

My explanation also does not require that people be poorly informed about their options. It does not require imperfect mobility. It does not require that anyone be irrational. Nor, finally, does it require powerful actors with the ability to impose their will on reluctant subordinates. All it requires is the basic Darwinian observation that individual incentives often differ from collective incentives. That condition is met when the ability to achieve important outcomes in many domains depends significantly on relative income.

The resulting wedge between individual and collective incentives also helps us understand other ways in which the invisible-hand account might break down. According to libertarians and other proponents of the invisible hand, market forces guide people not only to the best possible combinations of safety and wage income, but also to optimal combinations of other job characteristics and wage income. Consider, for example, the question of task specialization. As Adam Smith emphasized, the explosive productivity growth observed since the start of the Industrial Revolution is a consequence of greater division and specialization of labor. Smith also recognized, however, that as tasks became more specialized, they often took an increasing toll on the human psyche. Karl Marx insisted that capitalism pushed the process much too far, arguing that division and specialization “mutilate the laborer into a fragment of a man, degrade him to the level of an appendage to a machine, destroy every remnant of charm in his work and turn it into hated toil.”” Libertarians and other proponents of the invisible hand challenge Marx's claim by pointing out that it implies cash on the table. The argument is precisely analogous to their argument in the case of safety. If the claim that there is too little variety in the workplace is to be coherent, it must mean that the value workers place on having additional variety in their daily work routines is larger than the corresponding loss of output that would be caused by reduced specialization. But if workers care about relative income, that claim simply doesn't follow. Workers as a group might be happier if all had a little more variety and a little less income, for that shift wouldn't jeopardize anyone’s ability to achieve goals that depend on relative income. But no individual worker could move to a job with more variety without jeopardizing his ability to achieve such goals.

In like fashion, the wedge that separates individual and collective incentives can also be invoked to explain why people might end up in jobs that offer too little of other desirable working conditions. The labor market offers opportunities for people to earn additional income by accepting jobs that offer less autonomy, or that require them to perform tasks they find morally objectionable.” The lure of additional relative income is an important reason people accept such tasks. Yet when absolute incomes rise in tandem, relative purchasing power is little affected.

The fact that individual and collective incentives diverge when relative income matters also calls into question the traditional economic doctrine of revealed preference. This doctrine holds that we learn more about people's preferences by observing their behavior than by listening to what they say.” According to the doctrine, if someone could have bought additional variety by sacrificing $100 a week in wages yet chose not to, the additional variety must have been worth less than $100 to him. In terms of his individual valuation, that statement is true. But individual valuations and collective valuations need not coincide. When relative income matters, people who refuse to pay $100 for an increment in variety might find that increment worth far more than $100 if everyone made the same move in tandem.

No one can dispute that, beyond some point, the ability to achieve many important goals in life depends on relative purchasing power. A direct consequence of that fact is that when someone acquires additional income, she not only enhances her ability to achieve those goals, she simultaneously makes others less able to attain them. Or, to put the same point in the economist’s parlance, the same activities that put additional income into one person’s pocket impose negative externalities on others.

Many movement libertarians will be content either to ignore this problem or to insist that they have a right to cause indirect harm to others as they please. But as I will argue in chapter 6, the problem of indirect harm confronts the honest libertarian with a difficult choice. If he wants to claim a right to cause indirect harm to others, he must offer a cogent justification for that right, and that proves a difficult hurdle indeed.

I hope it’s fair to assume that an honest libertarian would not object to a hockey helmet rule on the grounds that it deprives individual hockey players of the right to decide for themselves whether to wear helmets. Of course the rule denies them that right! But that’s the very reason hockey players support it! They know that if they're permitted to skate without helmets, they'll feel they must. And they don’t want to skate without helmets.

It's clearly a more serious matter to be restrained by the government than to be restrained by a hockey league. That fact alone might dictate more stringent standards for approving governmental restrictions. But the difference is one of degree, not kind. The reassuring news, as we'll see in coming chapters, is that it’s often possible to mitigate harm to others without having to enact prohibitions at all.
