Preface.

Behavioral economics has been the economics profession's runaway growth area of recent decades. Scholars in this area work largely at the intersection of economics and psychology. Much of their attention has focused on systematic biases in people’s judgments and decisions. As the late Amos Tversky, a Stanford University psychologist and a founding father of behavioral economics, liked to say, “My colleagues, they study artificial intelligence. Me? I study natural stupidity.”

In the early 1980s, I taught one of the first undergraduate courses in behavioral economics. Because few students had heard of this nascent field, my first challenge was to come up with a course title that might lure some to enroll. In the end, I decided to call it “Departures from Rational Choice.” Naturally, there was no standard syllabus then. After much thought, I decided to cover material under two broad headings: “Departures from Rational Choice with Regret” and “Departures from Rational Choice without Regret.”

Under the first heading, I listed studies that document the many systematic cognitive errors to which people are prone. For example, although standard rational choice models say that people will ignore sunk costs (costs that are beyond recovery at the moment of decision), such costs often influence choices in conspicuous ways. Suppose you're about to depart for a sporting event or concert at an arena 50 miles away when an unexpected heavy snowstorm begins. If your ticket is nonrefundable, your decision whether or not to drive to the event should not be influenced by the amount you paid for it. Yet a fan who paid $100 for his ticket is significantly more likely to make the dangerous drive than an equally avid fan who happened to receive his ticket for free. The first fan is probably guilty of a cognitive error. People typically seem to regret the decisions they make on the basis of such errors once they become aware of them.

Under the “ . . without Regret” heading, I listed studies that describe departures from the predictions of standard rational choice models that people do not seem to regret. A case in point is the way people typically react to one-sided offers in the so-called ultimatum game. In this game, the experimenter gives one subject some money—say, $100—and then tells him to propose a division of that sum between himself and a second subject. If the second accepts, each walks away with the amount proposed. For instance, if the first proposes “$60 for me and $40 for you” and the second accepts, the first gets $60 and the second gets $40. But here's the twist: if the second subject rejects the proposal, the $100 reverts to the experimenter, and each subject receives nothing.

Standard rational choice models predict that the first subject will make a one-sided proposal—such as $99 for himself and $1 for the second subject— since he knows that it would be in the second subject’s interest to accept rather than get nothing. But such offers are rarely proposed, and when they are, they are almost invariably rejected. Subjects who reject one-sided offers seldom voice regret about having done so.

From the beginning, most of the work in behavioral economics has focused on departures from rational choice with regret—those caused by cognitive errors. My former Cornell colleague Dick Thaler collaborated with Cass Sunstein to write Nudge, a marvelous 2008 book summarizing the myriad ways in which such errors lead people astray and how policy makers might restructure environments to facilitate better choices. I enthusiastically endorse almost all the proposals they advocate in that book.

From the beginning, however, I’ve believed that much bigger losses result from departures from rational choice without regret. That’s because people generally have both the desire and the ability to remedy cognitive errors unilaterally once they become aware of them. In contrast, we typically lack both the means and the motive to alter behaviors we don't regret, even when those behaviors generate large social costs.

Consider the assumption, standard in rational choice models, that the primary determinant of the satisfaction provided by any good is its absolute quality. That's clearly not true of the utility provided by an interview suit. If you're one of several similarly qualified applicants who all want the same investment banking job, it’s strongly in your interest to look good when you show up for your interview. But looking good is an inherently relative concept. It means looking better than the other candidates. If they show up wearing $500 suits, you'll be more likely to make a favorable first impression, and more likely to get a callback, if you show up in a $2,000 suit than if you show up in one costing only $200.

When the ability to achieve important goals depends on relative consumption, as it clearly does in a host of domains, all bets regarding the efficacy of Adam Smith's invisible hand are off. Notwithstanding the uncritically enthusiastic pronouncements of many of Smith’s modern disciples, unbridled market forces often fail to channel the behavior of self-interested individuals for the common good. On the contrary, as the pioneering naturalist Charles Darwin saw clearly, individual incentives often lead to wasteful arms races.

Darwin understood, for example, that peahens favored males with conspicuous tail displays, perhaps because such displays were a reliable signal of a robust immune system that could be passed along to offspring. (Parasiteridden males are metabolically unable to support long, brightly colored tail feathers.) But Darwin also recognized that conspicuous tail displays made peacocks more vulnerable to predators and were hence wasteful from the Ifall displays were smaller by half, the same males perspective of the species. would pair with the same females as before, but each male would be less vulnerable. Yet no individual peacock would have reason to regret having a_ bright tail display, because without one his chances of landing a mate would be much diminished. Similarly, job applicants are no more likely to get the positions they seek if all spend $2,000 on interview suits than if all had spent only $300. But that’s no reason to regret having bought the more expensive suit.

These are collective action problems, much like a military arms race. They have nothing to do with cognitive errors. Spending on interview suits is often excessive for the same reason that spending on armaments is excessive. In such situations, no individual or nation, acting alone, can profit by spending less.

In contrast, when individuals suffer losses because of their own cognitive mistakes, they have both the means and the motive to curtail their losses. They can seek additional information, for example, or employ experts to advise them. They can sign contracts that limit their ability to make such mistakes.

Not only are losses from collective action problems more difficult to remedy by individuals, they are also vastly larger than the losses caused by cognitive errors. But the good news, as I'll explain, is that simple, unintrusive changes in tax policy can eliminate many of the most important losses caused by collective action problems. In the process, I'll attempt to defend my prediction that economists a hundred years from now will be more likely to name Charles Darwin than Adam Smith as the intellectual founder of their discipline.

As I've read and listened to interviews with authors over the years, I've been struck by how frequently they've said something like “write about what you know” when asked to offer advice to young writers. The morning I sat down to begin work on the material that became chapter 9 of this book (“Success and Luck”), I thought to myself: Now that’s a subject I know a bit about!

Indeed, among the many emotions I experienced as I began work on this book in May 2010, the strongest by far was a sense of wonder at being able to work on it at all. Chance events play an enormous role in every life, of course. But I've enjoyed vastly more than my share of improbable good fortune.

One experience in particular stands out. For many years, my good friend and colleague Tom Gilovich and I have had a ninety-minute slot every Saturday morning at an indoor tennis facility near Ithaca. As we sat during a changeover early in our second set one morning almost four years ago, I felt a sudden wave of nausea. Apparently, I then fell to the court unconscious, with no discernible pulse.

A few days later, as I lay in a hospital bed, the attending physician told me that I'd experienced an episode of sudden cardiac arrest—an event, he explained, that is almost always fatal, and almost always severely disabling to the few who survive it.

Tom later described to me in detail what had happened. When I collapsed, he immediately shouted for someone to call an ambulance. Although he'd had no previous training in CPR, he'd seen it done in movies and on TV. He flipped me onto my back and began pounding vigorously on my chest, with no apparent effect. But he kept at it, and after what seemed like a long time, he said, I coughed weakly.

Although the tennis facility is in an isolated location several miles from town, by chance an auto accident had occurred nearby just fifteen minutes earlier. Because of an administrative error, not one but two ambulances had been dispatched to the scene of that accident. As the second ambulance approached, its driver received instructions to divert to the tennis facility. It arrived shortly after my collapse, the attendants with paddles at the ready.

Although I'd been without oxygen for an undetermined number of minutes, the bottom line was that, against all odds, I was out of the hospital four days later, having suffered no lasting ill effects. Two weeks later, Tom and I were back on the tennis court. Resuming play wasn’t a frightening step for me, since I'd passed a stress test with flying colors a few days earlier and had no firsthand recollection of my courtside collapse. But I know it was a trying experience for Tom.

In ways only slightly less dramatic, Karen Gilovich, Tom's wife, has also been a lifesaver. With deep fondness and gratitude, I dedicate this book to them.

This book’s existence also owes much to my extraordinary good fortune to have landed my position at Cornell University. Shortly after I started teaching here in 1972, I learned that I'd been the seventh of the seven new professors hired by my department the previous year. In no other year has the department hired more than four. A colleague later told me that when he seconded the motion for me to be offered the seventh position, the department chairman, a volatile man who favored a different candidate, was so angry that he threw a piece of chalk at him. The only other offer I had at the time was from a much less prominent university in the Midwest, which is where I would have ended up in any normal year.

I was lucky not only to have landed the Cornell job but also to have been able to keep it. In my fourth year, my lone published paper was one I'd coauthored with a classmate in graduate school, and I had no other papers nearly ready for submission. That year, the economist (and later Federal Reserve Board Governor) Ned Gramlich left his position at the Brookings Institution to visit Cornell’s economics department for two semesters. We quickly became close friends and, despite my conspicuous lack of tangible productivity, he seemed to think I had potential. When he asked whether I'd be willing to prepare a paper for a volume he was editing, I enthusiastically agreed. Eager to please, I worked really hard on the paper.

As it was nearing completion, Ned approached with a long face to apologize for the fact that his publisher had just canceled the volume. Disappointed, I sent the paper out for review, and six weeks later it was accepted by Econometrica—then, as now, one of the premiere economics journals. (For an economist, it is incomparably more advantageous professionally to publish a paper there than in a one-off edited volume.)

I was much more productive in my fifth year, but that would have made little difference except for the fact that each of the five papers I submitted that year was quickly accepted without revision by the American Economic Review, the Journal of Political Economy, or another leading economics journal. In the decades since, such quick turnaround never happened with any of my other papers. I was lucky, pure and simple.

For an academic, the opportunity to work with students and colleagues of the highest caliber is a rare privilege. The fact that I’ve been able to spend my career at a university like Cornell has made an enormous difference in the things I've been able to learn and do professionally. I’m sure I could have lived happily in many other places. But I never would have been able to write this book.

[also want to thank my wife, Ellen McCollister, for her incredible patience and support when I go into book mode. She’s been through this many times now, but if she’s grown weary of it in any way, she’s done a remarkable job of concealing it. Many economists spend their days proving mathematical theorems. One of the things I like most about writing about the experiences of real people is the opportunity it’s given me to discuss issues with Ellen and to benefit from her rich insights.

Others too numerous to mention have also been enormously helpful. But I would especially like to thank Bruce Buchanan, Gary Burke, Philip Cook, Tyler Cowen, Lee Fennell, Ted Fischer, Chris Frank, Herbert Gans, Srinagesh Gaverneni, Tom Gilovich, Marc Groeger, Maria Guadalupe, Henry Hansmann, Ori Heffetz, Moritz Heumer, Bob Hockett, Graham Kerslick, Mark Kleiman, Jim Luckett, David Lyons, Michael F. Martin, Rex Mixon, Sendhil Mullainathan, Tom Nagel, Matthew Nagler, Michael O’Hare, Sam Pizzigati, Kate Rubenstein, Tim Scanlon, Tom Schelling, Eric Schoenberg, Philip Seeman, Larry Seidman, Peter Singer, Jeff Sommer, Timon Spiluttini, Kai Tang, Steve Teles, Fidel Tewolde, Michael Waldman, David Sloan Wilson, Saskia Wittlake, and Andrew Wylie for their insightful comments. They of course bear no responsibility for any remaining errors.

Finally, I'm grateful to Peter Dougherty and Seth Ditchik at Princeton University Press for their early enthusiasm for this project and for their sage advice, which helped mold it into its current form. The title Id originally chosen was The Libertarian Welfare State. If the book succeeds in finding its audience, I'll have Peter and Seth (plus a prod from Michael F. Martin) to thank for persuading me to abandon that title, which now survives as a section head in chapter 12.

The alternative I originally preferred was Darwin’s Wedge, which eventually became the title of chapter 2. I liked the way it evokes the divergence between individual and group interests, which underlies my main thesis and whose importance Darwin understood so clearly. I also thought its unfamiliarity made it sound vaguely intriguing. Over dinner one evening, I asked several friends for their reactions. Before anyone else could respond, my wife said that the first thought that popped into her mind was “Darwin's wedgie.” Peals of laughter ensued. The next morning, I wrote to Peter Dougherty suggesting that we go with his first proposal, The Darwin Economy.
